Africa is losing its kings of the jungle. LAGOS, Nigeria — Philipp Henschel studies lions. He is very worried about lions in Africa. Henschel is 40 years old and a scientist. Henschel says that many years ago, lions lived all around the world. Now lions only live in India and Africa. India is a country in Asia. Leaders in India say just 500 lions are left there. Africa is a continent next to Asia. A continent is a huge piece of land. There are groups that care for animals. Henschel works for one of the groups. It says things are very bad for lions in Africa. The group says there are not many wild lions left in Africa. A wild animal lives outside and is not cared for by people. Africa has many parts. One part is called West Africa. Henschel wrote a report about lions there. The report says there are only 400 lions left in West Africa. They are more in danger than any other lions on Earth. Henschel has looked for lions in West Africa for many years. Then he found one in a park in Nigeria. Nigeria is a country in West Africa. Henschel was surprised to find a lion there. Nigeria has many people and not much room for lions. Henschel said people were excited because they had never seen a lion in that park. Henschel lives in Gabon. It is another country in West Africa. There were no lions in Gabon for many years. One day a scientist found a lion. The lion is named Ali. Henschel is helping to find two female lions for Ali. He hopes those lions will become a family and that soon there will be more lions in Gabon. Henschel searched many other parks in West Africa for lions. He only found nine. The report says lions are gone from other parts of Africa too. People are causing problems for the lions. Farms are on land that lions need. Cows are also raised on African land. There is less room for lions. Some farmers poison the cows that lions eat. Lions eat other animals. Some animals cannot find enough plants to eat. Then the animals disappear and the lions have no food. People are also hunting the animals that lions eat. Some people even hunt lions. This year, a famous lion named Cecil was killed in Africa. People all over the world were mad. Scientists like Henschel want to save lions in Africa. They are still finding ways to help.