In a San Francisco cove, sea lions and harbor seals bit three swimmers, forcing a temporary ban on swimming. The Aquatic Park Cove in San Francisco is popular with tourists. A cove is a small sheltered area on the side of a large body of water. The cove in California is a place to watch sea lions and harbor seals playing in the water.  For people who can stand the cold waters, the cove is known as one of the best places for an open-water swim. Open-water swimming is swimming in bodies of water outside like rivers, lakes or oceans.  However, in December, marine animals attacked three swimmers, officials said. ## Swimming Banned After Third Attack The National Park Service runs the cove. The incidents caused the department to ban swimming there for a few days after the third attack. On Friday, December 15, Park Service workers posted warning signs, saying, "Danger. Aquatic Park Cove Closed for Swimming Due to Multiple Marine Animal Bites." Earlier in the week, a member of the nearby rowing club was bitten in the cove, the San Francisco Chronicle said. That swimmer did not require medical treatment, the paper said.  On the afternoon of Thursday, December 14, a sea lion bit Christian Einfeldt. The animal got him in the arm while he was swimming more than 1,000 feet from the shore, a local news station reported. "I turned around and I saw a large male bull sea lion" a few feet away, Einfeldt told the news station. He became very concerned, he said. Einfeldt is a lawyer who has been swimming in the cove for two years. He is 56 years old. ## Sea Lion Kept Coming Einfeldt said that he tried to scare off the animal by shouting "No!" But the sea lion kept coming toward him.  "His head kind of actually slid down my arm because he was still coming forward," he added. "Fortunately he only got one tooth into my arm." Einfeldt was bleeding. He flagged down a sailboat and was taken to a hospital, the news station reported. The San Francisco Fire Department said it applied a tight bandage to Einfeldt, which probably saved his life. "I'm lucky to be alive," Einfeldt told the news station. "I'm happy to be alive right now." Less than one day later, a third swimmer was attacked. On the morning of Friday, December 15, Rick Mulvihill was bitten by a marine animal, the newspaper reported. He was in a part of the cove known as "the Jacuzzi." ## Nervous Swimmers "It hit him right here," Bob Roper, a member of the rowing club with Mulvihill, said while pointing to the inside of his upper leg. "I've been here 50 years, and I've never heard of anything like this. You have a lot of very, very nervous swimmers now, and I don't blame them. It's pretty bad when you get bit by a seal." Other swimmers pulled Mulvihill from the water. He was taken to a hospital with a "severe bite," said a San Francisco fire worker. Officials said it can be difficult to tell sea lions from harbor seals. Both appear in Aquatic Park Cove. And both have been known to bite people occasionally in the nearby San Francisco Bay. ## Attacks Are Rare Such attacks are not common. According to the rowing club Mulvihill is part of, it is "rare." Swimmers are in more danger from boats, and from getting hypothermia, they say. Hypothermia is when people have a very low body temperature from being in the cold. Officials said it was not clear if the same animal bit all three swimmers. The cove was to be closed to swimmers for a few days as officials worked on a safety plan, they said. Shawn Johnson, a veterinarian with the Marine Mammal Center in California, said it was hard to say why these attacks happened. However, "any time you're interacting with a wild animal, there's a possibility of getting bit." Tourists in Steveston, British Columbia, Canada, had to be warned in May after an incident at the wharf. A sea lion pulled a young girl into the water by her dress near Fisherman's Wharf.   The girl was rescued. Video leading up to the incident showed a crowd on the dock close to the edge. Some were feeding the animal. People are not supposed to feed wild animals. Even with the warnings, officials said, more people are coming to look at the sea lion.