In a San Francisco cove, sea lions and harbor seals bit three swimmers, forcing a temporary ban on swimming. For San Francisco tourists, Aquatic Park Cove is one of the city's most recognizable areas. The site in California is a popular spot to watch enormous sea lions and harbor seals frolicking in the water across from Ghirardelli Square, a shopping and dining area.  For locals — or those who can brave the cold waters, in any case — the cove is known as one of the best places for an open-water swim, especially favored by triathletes. But this December, the cove's most prominent features clashed in a frightening manner, when "aggressive" marine mammals attacked three swimmers in the span of about five days, officials said. ## Multiple Marine Animal Bites The incidents prompted the National Park Service, which runs the cove, to temporarily ban swimming there over the weekend. On Friday, December 15, Park Service workers posted signs around the water that warned of the recent attacks: "Danger. Aquatic Park Cove Closed for Swimming Due to Multiple Marine Animal Bites." Earlier in the week, an unnamed member of the South End Rowing Club was bitten while in the cove but did not require treatment, according to the San Francisco Chronicle. On Thursday afternoon, December 14, a sea lion bit 56-year-old Christian Einfeldt in the right arm while he was swimming about a quarter-mile from the cove's shore, a local news channel reported.  ## Swimmer Became Very Concerned "I turned around and I saw a large male bull sea lion" a few feet away, Einfeldt, a lawyer who has been swimming in the cove for two years, told the news station from the hospital. He became very concerned, he said. Einfeldt said that he tried to ward off the animal by shouting "No!" but that the sea lion continued to approach. "His head kind of actually slid down my arm because he was still coming forward," he added. "Fortunately he only got one tooth into my arm." Bleeding, Einfeldt flagged down a nearby sailboat and was taken to a hospital with non-life-threatening injuries, the news station reported. The San Francisco Fire Department said it applied a tight bandage to Einfeldt's wound at Pier 45, which probably saved his life. "I'm lucky to be alive," Einfeldt told the news channel. "I'm happy to be alive right now." ## Third Attack Less Than 24 Hours After Second Less than 24 hours later, a third swimmer was attacked. On Friday morning, December 15, Rick Mulvihill was bitten in the groin area by a marine animal while in a part of the cove known as "the Jacuzzi," the Chronicle reported. "It hit him right here," Bob Roper, a fellow member of the South End Rowing Club, told the newspaper while pointing to the inside of his upper thigh. "I've been here 50 years, and I've never heard of anything like this. You have a lot of very, very nervous swimmers now, and I don't blame them. It's pretty bad when you get bit by a seal." Other swimmers reportedly pulled Mulvihill from the water to safety. He was taken to a hospital with a "severe bite," according to a San Francisco fire spokesman. ## If They Bite, It's Usually In The Bay Although Roper identified the animal that bit Mulvihill as a seal, officials told the Chronicle it can be difficult to distinguish between sea lions and harbor seals. Both species appear in Aquatic Park Cove, and both have been known to bite people occasionally in the nearby San Francisco Bay. Such attacks happen so infrequently, however, that the South End Rowing Club characterizes them as "rare" on its website in response to questions about the dangers of swimming in the bay. The club notes that boats and hypothermia, having a really low body temperature from being in the cold, are more dangerous. Representatives for the club, as well as for the Dolphin Club, a similar group, did not immediately respond to interview requests by Saturday, December 16. ## Any Interaction With A Wild Animal Is Risky, Vet Says Officials said it was unclear whether the same animal was responsible for all of the attacks. The cove was to be closed to swimmers for a few days as park officials work on a safety plan, they said in a statement. "It's really hard to speculate why this interaction happened," Shawn Johnson, a veterinarian with California's nonprofit Marine Mammal Center, told the news station. "But any time you're interacting with a wild animal, there's a possibility of getting bit." In May, officials in Steveston, British Columbia, Canada, issued numerous warnings about marine life there. A video had captured a California sea lion dragging a young girl into the water by her dress near the Steveston Fisherman's Wharf. As The Washington Post's Kristine Phillips reported, the girl was rescued. Video leading up to the incident showed a crowd on the dock gathered dangerously close to the edge, some feeding the animal. Despite the warnings, officials said, the incident seemed to attract even more curious onlookers who wanted to spot the sea lion. "Sometimes, you got to give your head a shake," Bob Baziuk, general manager of the Steveston Harbor Authority, told Canadian Broadcasting Corp. News.  "Steveston's going to be synonymous with the 'Jaws' theme pretty soon. You have a hungry animal, and these people are dumb enough to feed it," Baziuk said. "Jaws" is the name of an award-winning movie from 1975 in which a shark attacks people at a beach resort.