In a San Francisco cove, sea lions and harbor seals bit three swimmers, forcing a temporary ban on swimming. Aquatic Park Cove in San Francisco is one of the city's most well-known areas for tourists. The site in California is a popular spot to watch sea lions and harbor seals playing in the water across from the stores and restaurants in Ghirardelli Square. For local people, or at least those who can stand the cold waters, the cove is known as one of the best places for an open-water swim. The area is especially favored by triathletes who compete in three continuous races. The most popular form involves swimming, cycling and running.  But this December, the cove's biggest features clashed in a frightening manner. "Aggressive" marine mammals attacked three swimmers in the span of about five days, officials said. ## Signs Warn Of Recent Attacks The incidents prompted the National Park Service, which runs the cove, to temporarily ban swimming there over the weekend. On Friday, December 15, Park Service workers posted signs around the water that warned of the recent attacks, saying, "Danger. Aquatic Park Cove Closed for Swimming Due to Multiple Marine Animal Bites." Earlier in the week, a member of the local rowing club was bitten while in the cove, the San Francisco Chronicle said. That swimmer did not require treatment, the paper said.  On the afternoon of Thursday, December 14, a sea lion bit 56-year-old Christian Einfeldt. The animal got him in the arm while he was swimming about a quarter of a mile from the shore, a local TV station reported.  ## Bitten By A Large Male Bull Sea Lion "I turned around and I saw a large male bull sea lion" a few feet away, Einfeldt told the news station from the hospital. He became very concerned, he said. Einfeldt is a lawyer who has been swimming in the cove for two years. Einfeldt said that he tried to keep the animal away by shouting "No!" but the sea lion kept coming toward him.  "His head kind of actually slid down my arm because he was still coming forward," he added. "Fortunately he only got one tooth into my arm." Bleeding, Einfeldt flagged down a nearby sailboat and was taken to a hospital with injuries, the news station reported. The San Francisco Fire Department said it applied a tight bandage to Einfeldt's wound at Pier 45, which probably saved his life. "I'm lucky to be alive," Einfeldt told the local news station. "I'm happy to be alive right now." Less than 24 hours later, a third swimmer was attacked. On the morning of Friday, December 15, Rick Mulvihill was bitten in the groin area by a marine animal, the Chronicle reported. He was in a part of the cove known as "the Jacuzzi." ## First Time In 50 Years "It hit him right here," Bob Roper, a fellow member of the rowing club, told the newspaper, pointing to the inside of his upper thigh. "I've been here 50 years, and I've never heard of anything like this. You have a lot of very, very nervous swimmers now, and I don't blame them. It's pretty bad when you get bit by a seal." Other swimmers reportedly pulled Mulvihill from the water to safety. He was taken to a hospital with a "severe bite," according to a San Francisco fire spokesman. Although Roper called the animal that bit Mulvihill a seal, officials said it can be difficult to distinguish between sea lions and harbor seals. Both species appear in Aquatic Park Cove. And both have been known to bite people occasionally in the nearby San Francisco Bay. ## Attacks Very Uncommon Such attacks are so uncommon, however, that the South End Rowing Club calls these kinds of attacks "rare." Swimmers are in more danger from boats, and from getting hypothermia, they say. Hypothermia is when people have a really low body temperature from being in the cold. Leaders from the club did not respond to interview requests by Saturday morning, December 16.  Officials said it was unclear whether the same animal was responsible for all of the attacks. The cove was to be closed to swimmers for a few days as park officials work on a safety plan, they said in a statement. Shawn Johnson, a veterinarian with the Marine Mammal Center in California, said it is hard to guess why attacks like this happen. "But any time you're interacting with a wild animal, there's a possibility of getting bit," he told the local news station.  ## Despite Warning, People Feed Sea Lion In Canada In May, officials in Steveston, British Columbia, Canada, gave out many warnings there. A video had captured a California sea lion dragging a young girl into the water by her dress near the Steveston Fisherman's Wharf. As The Washington Post reported, the girl was rescued. Video leading up to the incident showed a crowd on the dock gathered dangerously close to the edge, some feeding the animal. Despite the warnings, officials said, more people were crowding the wharf to get a look at the sea lion.  "Sometimes, you got to give your head a shake," Bob Baziuk, general manager of the Steveston Harbor, told a Canadian news channel. "Steveston's going to be synonymous with the 'Jaws' theme pretty soon. You have a hungry animal, and these people are dumb enough to feed it." "Jaws" is the name of an award-winning movie from 1975 in which a shark attacks people.