In a San Francisco cove, sea lions and harbor seals bit three swimmers, forcing a temporary ban on swimming. San Francisco, California, is a popular place to visit. Many people go to the Aquatic Park Cove when they are there. At the park, visitors can watch sea lions and seals. The sea animals play in the water. People also like to swim there. Three swimmers have been bitten in December, though. A sea lion or seal bit them. Seals are sea animals that have flippers. They can walk on all fours, like a dog.  ## No Swimming Allowed The attacks caused city leaders to stop swimmers from using the park. Workers put up signs saying swimming was not allowed. They are worried that swimmers might get bitten. Someone from a boat club was bitten, a newspaper said. That swimmer did not need to go to the doctor.  On December 14, a sea lion bit Christian Einfeldt. The animal bit him in the arm, a news channel said. He had been swimming away from the shore.  "I turned around and I saw a large male bull sea lion" a few feet away, Einfeldt said. He got very worried.  ## Tried To Scare Off Animal Einfeldt said that he tried to scare off the animal by shouting "No!" The sea lion kept coming, though. "His head kind of actually slid down my arm," he said. The animal got only one tooth into his arm, he said.  Einfeldt was bleeding. He called for help, and a sailboat stopped to help him. He was taken to a hospital, the news station said. The San Francisco Fire Department said it helped Einfeldt stop the bleeding, which probably saved his life. ## Happy To Be Alive Einfeldt said he is happy to be alive. He has been swimming in the cove for two years. He is 56 years old. One day later a third swimmer was attacked. Rick Mulvihill was bitten by an animal in the water. He was bitten on the inside of his upper leg.  Other swimmers pulled Mulvihill from the water. He was taken to a hospital with a serious bite, a firefighter said. Leaders said it can be hard to tell sea lions from seals. Both are in the cove.  Attacks like this are not common. One San Francisco boat club said it was "rare."  It was not clear if the same animal bit all three swimmers. Leaders were working on a safety plan. This will help keep swimmers in the cove safe.