A huge mass of seaweed, bigger than the state of Massachusetts and sometimes 16 inches deep, has covered the waters and beach of Qingdao. It's hard work to clear it, but fun to play in. QINGDAO, China — For Li Lejun, there’s one easy way to make the beach even better than expected. Just add seaweed — hundreds and hundreds of tons of it. Li's back was covered in what looked like strands of bright yellow cotton candy. The 7-year-old boy from Beijing was having the time of his life Sunday at No. 1 Bathing Beach in this city 350 miles north of Shanghai. Men nearby in swim briefs used pitchforks to throw mounds of seaweed into a yellow front-end loader. In the other direction, a backhoe scooped big piles of it into dump trucks. On Saturday, Lejun and his 69-year-old grandpa had helped gather globs of it from the sea. “It’s really fun to play with!” Lejun said. “It’s very soft and fun to touch.” Seaweed has grown around the waters of this city like a bright green carpet. It has done this for at least the sixth year in a row. This year the seaweed was measured at about 11,500 square miles, larger than the entire state of Massachusetts. Some beaches are buried under 16 inches of the flossy plant. The seaweed started to show up a month ago. Officials have sent 2,440 people to try to keep up with the plant. Every year, it turns Qingdao’s shoreline into something more like a shore-lawn. A lifeguard said that on the worst days, he has 100 men who arrive by 3 a.m. They clear the water and the shore using boats, nets and construction equipment. “On a heavy day, we can load up 15 trucks,” he said. “Sometimes we get 150 or even 160 tons in a day.” The algae is called hutai in Mandarin. It grows wild in summer. Days are longer and the sun is high in the sky. Growth can be kick-started by high amounts of chemicals in the water. Tim Nelson is a seaweed expert at Seattle Pacific University. He said those chemicals may be naturally in the water but get stirred up from deeper in the ocean. Or they could be brought by dirt washing into the sea from farms, golf courses and gardens. But once the seaweed starts growing, there’s little stopping it. In general, the plant isn't dangerous. Brave beachgoers have been playing in the green seas. They lay on soft-looking green beds of the material on shore. They are even burying themselves in big green piles of the stuff. Qingdao is living up to its name, which means “Green Island.” Local leaders are sending the seaweed to five factories. The water gets sucked out and the material is dried to make into animal feed or fertilizer. Some of it becomes a medical supplement known as hutai sugar. Netizens in China have started to think of other uses for all the seaweed. One user of the microblog Weibo shared a recipe for a hutai dish that looked like guacamole. In southern China, hutai is enjoyed as a food. It sells for about $6 a pound dried. It can be fried with peanuts or shrimp, mixed into spring rolls, or made into pancakes. Qingdao isn’t the only place that’s been washed with similar “green tides.” Seaweed blankets have been reported in Puget Sound, Wash.; Rhode Island, England and France. The seaweed can rot and give off toxic fumes if left for more than a day. In 2009, a Frenchman riding his horse came across piles of it along the coast. Both he and the horse fainted, and the horse died. Large mats of seaweed can also be dangerous to sea plants and animals. They can get thick enough and dense enough to steal oxygen from patches of ocean. Conditions for the seaweed growth are best at about 68 degrees. Once temperatures rise to about 73, the seaweed will sink or begin to die off naturally. Until then, Dong Ji-sheng will continue reporting for pitchfork duty at 4:30 a.m. at No. 1 Bathing Beach. “There’s more this year than last year. It must have something to do with the changing climate,” he said. “It’s a natural disaster.” Wu Chengyao is a Chinese teacher visiting Qingdao. He said he’s enjoying the hutai invasion while it lasts. “I long for the sea,” he said Sunday. He buried his feet into a soft mass of the seaweed on the shore. Gentle waves covered his ankles. “This won’t discourage me at all.”