Surf turns into turf as huge mass of green algae covers the shore. It's fun to play in. You can lay on your back on this seaweed blanket to sunbathe. It's also backbreaking to clear the stuff. QINGDAO, China — There’s one easy way to make the beach even better for Li Lejun. Just add seaweed. Hundreds and hundreds of tons of it. Li's back was covered in what looked like strands of bright yellow cotton candy. The 7-year-old boy from Beijing was having the time of his life. His legs were buried in the sand on the beach covered by seaweed. Men nearby were using pitchforks to throw seaweed into a yellow front-end loader. In the other direction, a backhoe was scooping it into dump trucks. On Saturday, Lejun and his 69-year-old grandpa had helped gather it from the sea. “It’s really fun to play with!” Lejun said. “It’s very soft and fun to touch.” Seaweed has grown in the waters of this city like a bright green carpet. This is at least the sixth year in a row. This year the seaweed was grew to about 11,500 square miles. The state of Massachusetts not as large. Some beaches are buried under 16 inches of the flossy plant. The seaweed started to show up a month ago. Officials have sent 2,440 people to try to keep up with the plant. Every year, it turns Qingdao’s shoreline into something more like a lawn. A lifeguard said on the worst days he has 100 men arrive by 3 a.m. They clear the water and the shore using boats, nets and trucks. “On a heavy day, we can load up 15 trucks,” he said. “Sometimes we get 150 or even 160 tons in a day.” The algae is called hutai in China. It grows wild in summer when days are longer and the sun is high in the sky. High levels of chemicals in the water can kickstart the growth. Tim Nelson is a seaweed expert at Seattle Pacific University. He said those chemicals might get stirred up from deeper in the ocean. Or they could be brought by dirt from farms, golf courses and gardens washing into the sea. But once the seaweed starts growing, it's hard to stop it. In general, the plant isn't dangerous. Brave people have been playing in the green seas. They lay on soft-looking green beds of the seaweed on shore. They are even burying themselves in big green piles of the stuff. Qingdao is living up to its name, which means “Green Island.” Local leaders are sending the seaweed off to factories. The water gets sucked out and the material is dried. They make it into animal feed or fertilizer. Some of it becomes a medical supplement known as hutai sugar. Netizens in China have tried to think of other uses for all the seaweed. One user of the microblog Weibo shared a recipe for a hutai dish that looked like guacamole. In southern China, hutai is enjoyed as a food. It sells for about $6 a pound dried. It can be fried with peanuts or shrimp. Some people mix it into spring rolls or pancakes. But Qingdao isn’t the only place that’s had “green tides.” Seaweed blankets have been reported in Puget Sound, Wash.; Rhode Island, England and France. The seaweed can rot and give off poison fumes. A man riding his horse along the coast in France came across huge piles of it. Both he and the horse fainted, and the horse died. Large mats of seaweed can also be dangerous to sea plants and animals. They can steal oxygen from patches of ocean. Conditions for seaweed growth are best at about 68 degrees. Once temperatures rise to about 73, the seaweed will sink or begin to die off naturally. Until then, Dong Ji-sheng will keep showing up for pitchfork duty at 4:30 a.m. at No. 1 Bathing Beach. “There’s more this year than last year. It must have something to do with the changing climate,” he said. “It’s a natural disaster.” Wu Chengyao is a Chinese teacher visiting Qingdao. He said he’s enjoying the hutai while it lasts. “I long for the sea,” he said Sunday. He buried his feet into a soft mound of the seaweed on the shore. Gentle waves covered his ankles. “This won’t discourage me at all.”