A sea of green has transformed the water and a beach in China into a flossy carpet, with the algae sometimes almost a foot and a half deep. The seaweed is called hutai in Mandarin. QINGDAO, China — As far as Li Lejun is concerned, there’s one easy way to make a July beach vacation even better than expected: Add seaweed. Hundreds and hundreds of tons of it. Buried up to his thighs in sand, Li's back was covered in what looked like strands of bright yellow cotton candy. The 7-year-old Beijing boy was having the time of his life Sunday at No. 1 Bathing Beach in this city 350 miles north of Shanghai. Nearby, men in swim briefs used pitchforks to fling mounds of algae into a yellow front-end loader. In the other direction, a backhoe scooped great piles of it into dump trucks. On Saturday, Lejun and his 69-year-old grandpa had helped gather globs of it from the sea, plopping it into plastic bags with other volunteers. “It’s really fun to play with!” Lejun said. “It’s very soft and fun to touch.” For at least the sixth year running, a giant algae bloom has surrounded the waters of this city like a bright green shag carpet growing wild. This year’s seaweed was measured at about 11,500 square miles, an area larger than Massachusetts. Some beaches are buried under 16 inches of the flossy plant, known to scientists as Ulva prolifera. The seaweed began to appear a month ago. Officials have sent 2,440 people to try to keep pace with the annual phenomenon that turns Qingdao’s shoreline into something more like a shore-lawn. At No. 3 Bathing Beach, a supervisor said that on the most severe days, he has 100 men who arrive by 3 a.m. to start clearing the water and the shore, using boats, nets and construction equipment. “On a heavy day, we can load up 15 trucks; each load is 7 or 8 tons,” he said. “Sometimes we get 150 or even 160 tons in a day.” The algae, called hutai in Mandarin, flourishes in summer. Days are longer and the sun is high in the sky. Growth can be kick-started by abundant nitrogen and other chemicals in the water. Tim Nelson, a seaweed expert at Seattle Pacific University, said those chemicals may be naturally in the water, stirred up from deeper in the ocean. Or they could be brought by fertilizer washing into the sea from farms, golf courses and gardens. Once Ulva prolifera gets to growing, though, there’s little stopping it. “How does it reproduce? How doesn’t it reproduce?” said Nelson, explaining that the algae can grow by making spores or even splitting itself in half. “It’s got a lot of flexibility.” In general, the plant poses no danger to humans. Brave beachgoers have been playing in the green seas, laying on soft-looking green beds of the material on shore. They are even burying themselves in big green stacks of the stuff, which is helping Qingdao live up to its name, which means “Green Island.” In 2008, the algae threatened Qingdao’s hosting of the Olympic sailing race, so the government sent 1,000 soldiers to help clear the waters. These days, local authorities are carting off the seaweed to five processing plants. The water is sucked out and the material is dried, then made into animal feed or fertilizer. Some of it becomes a medical supplement known as hutai sugar, which is said to help lower blood sugar. Media coverage of the seaweed surge has caused a sensation in China. Netizens started to brainstorm other uses for all the algae. One user of the microblog Weibo shared a recipe for a hutai dish that looked like guacamole. In southern China, hutai is enjoyed as a food. It sells for about $6 a pound dried. It can be fried with peanuts or shrimp, mixed into spring rolls, or made into pancakes. Qingdao isn’t the only place that’s been washed with similar “green tides.” Outbreaks have been reported in Puget Sound, Wash.; Rhode Island, England and France. The seaweed can rot and give off toxic fumes if left for more than a day, Nelson said. In 2009, a Frenchman riding his horse came across piles of it along the coast. Both he and the horse fainted, and the horse died. Large algae blooms can also be dangerous to sea plants and animals. The layer of growth can get thick enough and dense enough to steal oxygen from patches of ocean, Nelson said. Conditions for the algae growth are best at about 68 degrees. Once temperatures rise to about 73, the algae will sink or begin to die off naturally, Liu and others said. Until then, Dong Ji-sheng, 61, will continue reporting for pitchfork duty at 4:30 a.m. at No. 1 Bathing Beach. “There’s more this year than last year. It must have something to do with the changing climate,” he said. “It’s a natural disaster.” Wu Chengyao, 38, a Chinese teacher visiting Qingdao, said he’s enjoying the hutai invasion while it lasts. “I long for the sea,” he said Sunday. He buried his feet into a soft mass of the seaweed on the shore, gentle waves lapping at his ankles. “This won’t discourage me at all.”