What happens when an amoeba "eats" your brain? It doesn't often attack and we don't know why it chooses certain victims. But when it does, the amoeba eats it quickly and the infection kills. Nine-year-old Hally Yust died in July from a rare infection. A brain-eating amoeba got into her body while she was swimming near her family’s home in Kansas. An amoeba is a tiny, single-cell living being, or organism. The one responsible in this case is called Naegleria fowleri, or N. fowleri. It lives in warm freshwater lakes and rivers. N. fowleri usually targets children and young adults. Once in the brain, it makes the brain swell. The infection kills almost everybody it attacks. More than 97 percent of its victims die within days. Infections are exceedingly uncommon — there were only 34 reported in the United States during the past 10 years. Still, evidence suggests they may be increasing. Prior to 2010, more than half of the cases came from Florida, Texas and other Southern states. Since then, infections have turned up as far north as Minnesota. “We’re seeing it in states where we hadn’t seen cases before,” says Jennifer Cope. She is an expert in amoeba infections at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The CDC is in charge of protecting America from health and safety threats. The infections could be moving to other places because of climate change, Cope said, as Naegleria thrives in warmer temperatures. “It’s something we’re definitely keeping an eye on.” Cope adds, “When it comes to Naegleria there’s a lot we don’t know.” One of those things is why it chooses its victims. The amoeba has ways to slip past the body's disease defenses, or immune system. Treatment options are also limited, partly because of how fast the infection moves. But research suggests that the infection can be stopped if it is caught soon enough. So what happens during an N. fowleri infection? The amoeba enters the body when water goes up the nose. It sticks to the mucous membranes in the nasal cavity. Then N. fowleri digs into the olfactory nerve, the structure that enables our sense of smell. The olfactory nerve leads directly to the brain. It probably takes more than a drop of liquid to trigger a Naegleria infection. Infections usually occur in people who have been playing water sports or other activities that might force a lot of water up the nose. Some of those activities include diving, waterskiing, wakeboarding, and in one case a baptism dunking. It turns out that "brain eating" is actually a pretty accurate description for what the amoeba does. The amoeba moves to the olfactory bulbs in the front of the brain. There, N. fowleri feasts on tissue using suction-cup-like structures on its surface. This destruction leads to the first symptoms — loss of smell and taste. Those symptoms show up about five days after the infection sets in. From there, the amoeba moves to the rest of the brain. First, it gobbles up the protective covering that surrounds the central nervous system. When the body notices that something is wrong, it sends cells to combat the infection. This causes the surrounding area to become inflamed. It is this inflammation that contributes most to the early symptoms of headache, nausea, vomiting and stiff neck, not the loss of brain tissue. Neck stiffness in particular comes from the inflammation, as the swelling around the spinal cord makes it impossible to flex the muscles. As N. fowleri consumes more tissue and penetrates deeper into the brain, the secondary symptoms set in. They include confusion, seeing things that are not there, having trouble making sense and involuntary muscle movements. Ultimately, what causes death is the extreme pressure in the skull from the inflammation and swelling related to the body’s fight against the infection. Increasing pressure forces the brain down into where the brain stem meets the spinal cord. Eventually the connection between the two breaks. Most patients die from losing their ability to breathe less than two weeks after the symptoms began. The threat of contracting an N. fowleri infection is remote — many more people die every year from drowning — but you can take some measures to lower the risk even further. Cope recommends using nose plugs and not putting your head fully under water when swimming. She also says not to kick up mud in the water, which can shake the amoeba loose. More effective treatments may be on the horizon. Last year, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved Miltefosine, a drug originally intended as an anti-cancer treatment. In 2013, two people in the United States survived N. fowleri when they took the drug (and others) soon after being infected. In June, scientists figured out the order of the amoeba’s DNA, the building blocks that make it what it is. Their insights may help us to understand what makes it so deadly and point the way to better treatments. Until then, hold your nose.