An amoeba that lives in warm, fresh waters does not often bother people. But when it chooses a victim, usually someone young, it gets into the body and "eats" its way through the brain. Naegleria fowleri is a tiny living being. It lives in warm lakes and rivers. Scientists call it N. fowleri. Other people may call it a brain-eating amoeba. It can cause a very rare, deadly disease. It eats brains. Nine-year-old Hally Yust died from the illness recently. The amoeba got into her body while she was swimming. N. fowleri is a type of amoeba. This particular amoeba makes the brain swell. The infection kills almost everybody N. fowleri attacks. The victims die within days. Not many people get the infection. Only 34 were reported in the United States during the past 10 years. That number might be increasing. Before 2010, more than half of the cases came from Southern states. Since then, infections have turned up as far north as Minnesota. “We’re seeing it in states where we hadn’t seen cases before,” says Jennifer Cope. She is an expert in amoeba infections at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The CDC is in charge of protecting America's health and safety. The infections could be moving to other places because of climate change, Cope said. N. fowleri thrives in warmer temperatures. Cope says we do not know a lot about the amoeba. We do not know why it chooses its victims. The body has defenses against diseases. These defenses are called the immune system. But the amoeba has been able to slip past the immune system. There also are not a lot of ways to treat the infections. One reason is the illness moves quickly. But the infection can be stopped if it is caught soon enough. What happens during an N. fowleri infection? The amoeba enters the body when water goes up the nose. It sticks to the mucous membranes. Those membranes are the slimy stuff inside your nose. Then the N. fowleri digs into the olfactory nerve. That nerve is what lets us smell things. The nerve also leads directly to the brain. People who get infections usually have been doing something that forces a lot of water up the nose. Some of those activities include diving and waterskiing. One case happened during a baptism dunking. The amoeba moves to the front of the brain. There, it eats some of the brain. The destruction of that part of the brain causes loss of smell and taste. Those are the symptoms, or signs of disease. They show up about five days after the infection sets in. From there, the amoeba travels to the rest of the brain. First, it gobbles up the protective covering that surrounds the central nervous system. When the body notices that something is wrong, it sends cells to fight the infection. This causes the surrounding area to become swollen. The swelling leads to headaches, nausea, vomiting and a stiff neck. The amoeba eats more tissue. It moves deeper into the brain. Then the next symptoms set in. They include confusion, seeing things that are not there, and uncontrollable muscle movements. In the end, the swelling in the skull causes a lot of pressure. The pressure forces the brain down into where the brain stem meets the spinal cord. The connection between the two breaks. Then people stop breathing. Most patients die less than two weeks after the symptoms began. The threat of getting an N. fowleri infection is small. In fact, many more people die every year from drowning. You can do some things to lower the risk even more. Cope recommends using nose plugs and not putting your head fully under water when swimming. She also says not to kick up mud in the water, which can shake the amoeba loose. Better treatments may be on the horizon. Last year, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved Miltefosine, a drug first invented as an anti-cancer treatment. In 2013, two people in the United States survived N. fowleri when they took drugs, including Miltefosine, soon after being infected.