Some rare amphibians are disappearing quicker than thought. Even common critters are losing ground. BALTIMORE — Some of the creatures that give the early signals of spring appear to be fading away. A new study finds frogs, toads and salamanders disappearing at an alarming rate across the United States. Scientists report that environmentally sensitive amphibians are dying out in more places and more quickly than previously thought. Even the most common critters appear to be losing ground. They also seem to be vanishing from ponds, streams, wetlands and other areas in national parks and wildlife refuges. These places are supposed to be protected. “What we found was a little surprising,” said Evan Grant, a government biologist who monitors amphibians in the Northeast. If the trend continues, some of the rarer amphibians could be gone from roughly half the sites where they are now found in as few as six years. More common species could see similar declines in 26 years. Researchers have known for some time that some frogs, toads and salamanders were in trouble. But this is the first time they have a broad national picture of how fast they were disappearing. Besides fascinating children of all ages, amphibians help control mosquitoes and other insects. What happens to them is also important to watch for signs of changes in the environment, because they spend part of their lives in water and part on land. They are cold-blooded, depending on the sun’s warmth to stay active, and breathe through their skin. This makes them sensitive to changes in water quality. “Amphibians are a good indicator of what’s going on,” said Joel Snodgrass, a biology professor. It is hard to observe the animals' behavior because they tend to lurk in the water or under rocks, Snodgrass said. The new study is valuable because it made repeated checks over many locations for a long period. Researchers looked and listened for amphibians at nearly three dozen sites over nine years. Researchers did not expect to see declines in many of the more common species. Earlier studies indicated perhaps one-third of the nation’s species were losing ground. So researchers had expected to find some species improving while others faced trouble. But looking at results for 48 species across all the sites, the study showed the animals were found less often where they normally live. On average, the number of locations where amphibians could be found shrank 3.7 percent per year. If that continued, they would be in half as many places in about 20 years. “We don’t know how long it’s been going on or whether it’s a trend that will continue,” said Michael Adams, a government scientist in Oregon. The study did not attempt to say why the amphibians were disappearing. Disease, chemicals, climate change, development and even a new species being added to a habitat have been blamed in the past. The researchers monitored sites controlled by the U.S. Department of the Interior, so development probably had little direct impact on the amphibians’ habitat. “The fact that we see declines even in protected areas means there is some larger-scale issue going on with amphibian populations,” Grant said. Parts of the nation suffered severe drought during the study, the researchers noted. That might have reduced the amount of rain sustaining wetlands and ponds. Scott Stranko, a Maryland biologist, said there are fewer of some of the salamanders that are more sensitive to changes in landscape or water quality. The evidence shows "where you have urban development you lose salamanders and probably some frogs as well,” said Mark Southerland, an ecologist. The Northern two-lined salamander, for instance, appears to be pretty tolerant of changes to its habitat. It is still found widely, he said. But other apparently more sensitive species show up less often. Another factor contributing to amphibian declines in cities is the widespread use of salt to keep roads clear of ice and snow, Snodgrass said. Changes in the salt level can kill the freshwater aquatic insects on which salamanders and frogs feed. The salt also poses a direct threat to amphibians. Because they breathe through their skin, increases in water salinity can cause them to lose vital fluid from their bodies. “Basically, they die of thirst in an aquatic environment,” Snodgrass said.