Frogs and toads and salamanders are disappearing faster than thought, a study found. BALTIMORE —Frogs and toads and salamanders are disappearing fast in the United States, a study says. Frogs, toads and salamanders are all amphibians. They spend part of the time on land and part of the time in water. Scientists who ran the study say they are finding amphibians in fewer places than previously thought. The animals are also disappearing faster than the scientists expected. They are vanishing from ponds, streams and other areas in national parks and wildlife refuges. Animals are supposed to be safe in these places. “What we found was a little surprising,” said Evan Grant. He is a government scientist. If this keeps up, some of the rarer amphibians could vanish from half their homes in six years. Even the more common ones could be gone from half their homes in 26 years. Scientists knew that some frogs and toads were in trouble. But now they can see how fast they are disappearing across the country. Frogs and their relatives are important in nature. They eat mosquitoes and other insects. They are also cold-blooded. That means they need the sun’s warmth to stay active. They breathe through their skin. So they can tell if the water changes. It is hard to see the animals' behavior because they tend to hide in the water or under rocks, Joel Snodgrass, a biology professor, said. The new study helped fix this problem. Scientists looked at lots of places. They did this for nine years. They were surprised by what they found. They did not expect to see so many common amphibians disappearing. This is bad news. If things keep going this way, you may not be able to find a frog or toad in half the places you used to by the time you are in your mid-20s. The scientists did not try say why the critters were disappearing. Disease, chemicals and climate change have been blamed in the past. Parts of the nation had very little snow or rain while the study was going on. That might have meant that there was less water in the wetlands and ponds where amphibians live. Salamanders are amphibians that look like slimy lizards. Some of them feel changes to water or the land more than others. Quite a few of these more sensitive salamanders have disappeared. When cities and suburbs get bigger, you lose some salamanders, said Mark Southerland. You probably lose some frogs too, he said. Southerland is an ecologist who studies living things and where they live. Frogs and their friends in and around cities might be hurt by winter weather. Or at least how cities deal with that weather. That is because cities use rock salt to melt ice and snow on their roads, Snodgrass said. Salamanders and frogs eat insects that live in fresh water. The road salt can kill those insects. The salt also hurts amphibians more directly. Because they breathe through their skin, if there is more salt in the water, the animals lose fluid in their bodies. “Basically, they die of thirst" even in the water, Snodgrass said.