Countries approve world's largest marine reserve, twice the size of Texas, off Antarctica WELLINGTON, New Zealand — The countries in charge of Antarctica's waters have reached an agreement to protect life in the ocean next to the frozen continent. The historic agreement was reached on Friday. It created the world's largest marine protected area. The agreement comes after years of talks between Russia and the U.S. Russia has said "no" to the idea in the past. Supporters of the reserve, or protected area, say it sets an example for a group of countries working together to protect a large part of the ocean. No one country controls the area that is being protected. The deal covers an area about twice the size of Texas. The reserve is in the Ross Sea, a part of the ocean just off Antarctica. The deal was reached after 24 countries and the European Union met in Hobart, Australia. The European Union is a group of more than 20 European countries which works together to create peaceful relations and free trade between the countries. Decisions on Antarctic fishing require an agreement among the 25 members. Getting all the members to agree has been a problem in the past. The U.S. and New Zealand have been pushing for a marine reserve for years. New Zealand is a country in the southern Pacific Ocean. They first asked for the reserve in 2012\. They were turned down five times before Friday's agreement. Ukraine, China and Russia had expressed concerns in the past. Russia was the last country to agree to the deal. The marine protected area covers 1.6 million square kilometers, or 617,000 square miles. No commercial fishing, or fishing for business, will be allowed in about three-quarters of that area. Some will be allowed in the rest of the protected area. A small amount of fishing for research purposes will be allowed throughout the protected area. Several countries fish in the waters surrounding Antarctica for toothfish. The fishing can be a profitable business. Evan Bloom led the U.S. negotiators in Hobart. He said that U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry has been a big supporter for the reserve. He has been pushing for it in high-level talks with Russian leaders, including President Vladimir Putin. Bloom said he was "thrilled" with the result. "This is a real win for marine conservation," he said. In a statement, Kerry said the agreement "will safeguard one of the last unspoiled ocean wilderness areas on the planet." The area has a lot of different marine life, he said. Penguins, seals, whales, seabirds, and fish all live there. New Zealand's Foreign Minister Murray McCully said the final agreement included some points to get Russia to agree. The reserve's boundaries were changed. Also, a little more commercial fishing will be allowed. Still, he said, he was pleasantly surprised that Russia and the U.S. had managed to reach any kind of agreement. The two countries have been arguing about the fighting in Syria, he said. Syria, a country in the Middle East has been facing much violence. The people there are fighting their own government. Russia has been helping the Syrian government, which the United States disagrees with. "It goes to demonstrate that you can never jump to conclusions," he said. "Every now and then you get lucky." Andrea Kavanagh directs Antarctic and Southern Ocean work for The Pew Charitable Trusts. She said the environment had become an important project for Putin's former chief of staff, Sergei Ivanov. "We couldn't be happier about this result," she said. "This is history. This has never been done before." Kavanagh said she hoped the agreement represented what would become a worldwide network of marine reserves. Such areas would help protect the Earth's oceans, she said. The nations are already considering plans for other marine protected areas near Antarctica. "We are confident that these areas will be protected in the coming years," said Mike Walker. He works for the Antarctic Ocean Alliance, a group trying to protect the ocean around Antarctica. The agreement will take effect from December 2017\. It will last at least 35 years for most of the reserve.