Countries approve world's largest marine reserve, twice the size of Texas, off Antarctica WELLINGTON, New Zealand — A group of countries have made a deal. They will protect fish, penguins and other ocean life around Antartica. Dozens of countries agreed to the deal. It took years of talks between Russia and the United States. Russia has said "no" to the idea in the past. The deal sets up a marine protected area. It is also called a reserve. The reserve is about two times the size of Texas. The deal was made after a meeting in Australia. All of the countries had to agree on decisions on Antarctic fishing. Getting them all to agree has been a problem. The U.S. and New Zealand first asked for the reserve in 2012\. They were turned down five times. Ukraine, China and Russia had questioned the plan. Russia was the last to agree. No commercial fishing, or fishing for business, will be allowed in most of the protected area. Some will be allowed in certain parts. A small amount of fishing for science research will be allowed anywhere in the reserve. This sort of fishing will be done to learn more about the fish. Several countries fish in the waters surrounding Antarctica. They catch toothfish. People can make a lot of money selling toothfish. In the United States it is called Chilean sea bass. Evan Bloom led the United States negotiators. He said that John Kerry has been a big supporter of the reserve. Kerry is the U.S. Secretary of State. He has been pushing for the reserve in talks with Russian leaders. He even discussed it with Russian President Vladimir Putin. Bloom said he was "thrilled" with the deal. Kerry said it will protect "one of the last unspoiled" ocean areas on the planet. The area has a lot of different marine life, he said. Penguins and whales live there. Seals, seabirds, and fish also live there. New Zealand's foreign minister is Murray McCully. He said the final deal included some extra points to get Russia to agree. The reserve's borders were changed. Also, a little more commercial fishing will be allowed. Andrea Kavanagh works for The Pew Charitable Trusts. It is a nonprofit group. One of its goals is to protect the environment. Kavanagh said she hoped the deal was just the first step. She hopes there will be marine reserves all over the world. These would help protect the Earth's oceans, she said. The nations are already considering plans to protect other areas near Antarctica. The deal will begin in December 2017\. It will last at least 35 years for most of the reserve.