Countries approve world's largest marine reserve, twice the size of Texas, off Antarctica WELLINGTON, New Zealand — The countries in charge of Antarctica's waters have created the world's largest marine protected area in the ocean next to the frozen continent. The historic agreement to protect marine life was reached on Friday. The agreement comes after years of talks compromises and arguments between countries and high-level talks between Russia and the U.S. Russia has rejected the idea in the past. Supporters of the reserve say it sets an example for multiple countries working together to protect a large area of ocean. The area is not controlled by any single nation. The agreement covers an area about twice the size of Texas in the Ross Sea, a part of the ocean just off Antarctica. The deal was reached after 24 countries and the European Union met in Hobart, Australia, this week. Decisions on Antarctic fishing require an agreement among the 25 members. Getting all the members to agree on a protected zone has been a problem in the past. The U.S. and New Zealand have been pushing for a marine reserve for years. They first submitted a joint proposal in 2012\. It was rejected five times before Friday's agreement. Ukraine, China and Russia had expressed concerns in the past. Russia was the last country to agree to the deal. The marine protected area covers 1.6 million square kilometers, or 617,000 square miles. No commercial fishing will be allowed in about three-quarters of that area. Some commercial fishing will be allowed in the remaining ocean zones. A small amount of fishing for research purposes will be allowed throughout the protected area. Several countries fish in the waters surrounding Antarctica for toothfish, which can be a profitable business. Toothfish are often sold in North America as Chilean sea bass. Evan Bloom led the U.S. negotiators in Hobart. He said that U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry has been a passionate advocate for the reserve and has been pushing for it in high-level talks with Russian leaders, including President Vladimir Putin. Bloom said he was "thrilled" with the result. "We've been working on this for so many years and had so many disappointments trying to get here," he said. "This is a real win for marine conservation." In a statement, Kerry said the agreement "will safeguard one of the last unspoiled ocean wilderness areas on the planet." The area has a lot of different marine life. Kerry noted the "thriving communities of penguins, seals, whales, seabirds, and fish." New Zealand's Foreign Minister Murray McCully said the final agreement included some points to get Russia to agree. The reserve's boundaries were adjusted and a little more commercial fishing will be allowed in the area outside the non-fishing zone. Nevertheless, he said, he was pleasantly surprised that Russia and the U.S. had managed to reach any kind of agreement. The two countries have been arguing about how to handle fighting in Syria, he noted. "It goes to demonstrate that you can never jump to conclusions," he said. "Every now and then you get lucky." Andrea Kavanagh directs Antarctic and Southern Ocean work for The Pew Charitable Trusts. She said the environment had become a passion project for Putin's former chief of staff, Sergei Ivanov. "We couldn't be happier about this result," she said. "This is history. This has never been done before." Kavanagh said she hoped the agreement represented the first step in what would become a worldwide network of marine reserves. Such areas would help protect the Earth's oceans, she said. The nations are already considering proposals for other marine protected areas around Antarctica. "We are confident that these areas will be protected in the coming years," said Mike Walker. He works for the Antarctic Ocean Alliance, a group trying to preserve the ocean around Antarctica. The agreement will take effect from December 2017 and, for most of the reserve, will last at least 35 years.