The endangered Asiatic cheetah's numbers are critical. Only two female Asiatic cheetahs are known to be alive in the wild, and they live in Iran, a country in the Middle East. Asiatic cheetahs, also known as Iranian cheetahs, are a special breed of the fastest animal on Earth. This particular cheetah is critically endangered, which means that it is seriously at risk of becoming extinct. In fact, fewer than 40 are believed to remain in Iran. In the past decade, efforts to raise awareness about the cheetah have been displayed on Iran's soccer team uniforms and on stamps. Still, the Asiatic cheetah has only become increasingly endangered. Tuesday was Iran’s national cheetah day. The day marks an event that happened more than two decades ago when a cheetah cub named Marita survived an attack by a group of villagers. Marita's mother and two siblings were killed and Marita became a national symbol. Morteza Eslami is the head of the Iranian Cheetah Society (ICS), an organization  based in Iran's capital city of Tehran. The society aims to preserve the Asiatic cheetah. Eslami said camera traps located in areas with the most Asiatic cheetahs had seen just two females in recent months. “The situation is very critical,” he said. “We have been monitoring the situation closely in the past five years and the population of female Asiatic cheetahs has significantly dropped.” Conservationist Delaram Ashayeri said, “Unfortunately the number of female cheetahs has been dwindling. In areas where camera traps have been operating for a long time … we are not seeing many female cheetahs or we’re seeing only carcases.” In the past 15 years, 48 cheetahs are believed to have died. Seven died from natural causes, 21 at the hands of farmers, 15 in car accidents and five as a result of hunting. Of the two female cheetahs believed to be still alive, one is in Iran's Turan National Park and the other in the nearby Miandasht Reserve. “In some of our other environmental areas we haven’t had any reports of female cheetahs for at least two years now,” Eslami said. Two Asiatic cheetahs – a male named Koushki, and a female called Delbar – are held at Tehran’s Pardisan Park Research Center. Conservationists hope to increase the population of cheetahs by having the two reproduce. So far, though, the cheetahs have not successfully mated. Eslami said the fate of Asiatic cheetahs was important because two other big cats, the Caspian tiger and Persian lion, had become extinct in Iran. The Caspian tiger is extinct worldwide but a small population of Persian lions still remains in India. ICS has launched an online petition calling on Iran's president, Hassan Rouhani, to help. In the petition, they have asked the president to help prevent the construction of new roads and mines close to the areas where the cheetahs live. They have also asked Rouhani to put up fences around existing roads to help prevent car accidents. They hope to increase the number of people committed to helping the cheetahs. This means engaging with the people who live in the villages near the cheetahs and encouraging them to learn more about the animal. Iranian conservationists need more money and equipment to accomplish these goals. “If it wasn’t for the past work of conservationists, cheetahs would have become extinct by now, but despite the critical situation, we still have hope today,” Eslami said. “But more needs to be done.”