The endangered Asiatic cheetah's numbers are critical. A special cheetah is in danger of dying out. This cheetah is known as the Asiatic cheetah. They can only be found in Iran, a country in the Middle East. Right now, there are only two female Asiatic cheetahs known to be alive in the wild. Asiatic cheetahs are also known as Iranian cheetahs. The cheetah is the fastest animal on Earth. The Asiatic cheetah is endangered, which means that it is seriously at risk of dying out. In fact, fewer than 40 remain in Iran. Iran has tried to make people more aware of the animal. The country has put pictures of the cheetah on stamps. Iran's soccer team put the big cat on its uniforms. Still, the situation has only gotten worse for the Asiatic cheetah. Iran recently had a national cheetah day. The day marks an event that happened more than 20 years ago when a group of villagers attacked a cheetah cub named Marita. Marita's mother and two siblings were killed but Marita survived. The cheetah cub became a national symbol. The Iranian Cheetah Society (ICS) is a group based in Iran's capital city of Tehran. The society hopes to preserve the Asiatic cheetah. Morteza Eslami is the head of ICS. He said that the group has only seen two females in the past few months. ICS uses hidden cameras to photograph the cheetahs. The cameras are placed in areas where many Asiatic cheetahs live. Eslami said the situation was very bad. The population of female Asiatic cheetahs has dropped sharply in the past five years, he said. In the past 15 years, 48 cheetahs are believed to have died. Seven of these died from natural causes, 21 at the hands of farmers, and another 15 in car accidents. Five more were killed as a result of hunting. Of the two female cheetahs still believed to be alive, one is in Iran's Turan National Park. The other is in the nearby Miandasht Wildlife Refuge. Scientists are holding two other Asiatic cheetahs, a male and a female, at Tehran's Pardisan Park. They hope the two will have babies and increase the population of cheetahs. But so far, the cheetahs have not successfully mated. Eslami said the future of Asiatic cheetahs is important. Two other big cats, the Caspian tiger and Persian lion, have already died out in Iran. The Caspian tiger no longer exists anywhere in the world. However, a small population of Persian lions still remains in India. ICS has asked Iran's president, Hassan Rouhani, to help. The group has asked the president to help stop the construction of new roads and mines close to the areas where the cheetahs live. They have also asked Rouhani to put up fences around existing roads to stop car accidents. ICS hopes to get more people involved in helping. Eslami said that this work is very important to keep the Asiatic cheetah alive. He said that even though things do not look great for the cheetah right now, scientists still have hope. “But more needs to be done," he said.