Florida zoo adopts baby chimp Keeva is a baby chimpanzee. She was born March 12 to a female chimp at the Maryland Zoo in Baltimore. Keeva had a problem. Her mom, 26-year-old Carole, did not seem to be ready for the responsibilities of motherhood. Carole wasn’t mean to Keeva. She was not trying to hurt her. Trouble was, she was not doing much of anything with her baby. She wasn’t nursing her or bonding with her. So, Keeva is now living at the Lowry Park Zoo in Tampa, Florida. The staff there takes care of her like the zoo staff did in Baltimore. Workers took turns acting as Keeva’s mom, holding her and feeding her on eight-hour shifts to make her feel loved and protected. Keeva gets plenty of loving attention from her adoptive human parents. Lee Ann Rottman works at the Lowry Zoo. She says Keeva is starting out small, but she is catching up. Keeva weighed just a little over 3 pounds when she left Baltimore and she has grown to 5 pounds. The difference between the two zoos is that the Lowry Zoo has a chimp mom who has already raised two adopted chimp babies. Her name is Abby and she is 32 years old. Sadly, no Baltimore chimp could make the same claim. So when Keeva was 3 weeks old, she was flown to Tampa. One of the workers at the zoo where Keeva was born said that Keeva's mom, Carole, was a bit confused. She and her baby were just not connecting. Mother and baby chimps usually are able to bond. Zoo workers keep a close eye on female chimps to make sure they will be good mothers before they have babies. Stephen Ross works in zoos. A lot of his work is with chimpanzees. He said that in the last 10 years, there have only been one or two cases of mothers who did not show the proper behavior to take care of their babies. He also said that Carole was chosen as a chimp who would make a good mom. But when she had the baby, she was not doing the hard work it takes to be a mother. However, Keeva is still one lucky chimpanzee. If this had happened in the wild, she almost certainly would have died. After separating Keeva and Carole a first time, her keepers in Baltimore tried a reintroduction. They had hoped that maybe the separation had made Carole feel a little more motherly. The reintroduction did not go as hoped. So the decision was made to look for a surrogate. A surrogate takes on the responsibility of parenting a child to whom they are not related by blood. While Keeva was in Baltimore, her handlers took every step possible not only to keep her healthy and comfortable, but to make her think she was being raised by one of her fellow chimps. They held her all the time, wore fur vests, groomed her and made chimp noises to her. On March 29, Keeva and two of her Baltimore handlers boarded a plane for Tampa. She may have been too young to realize it, but the 17-day-old chimp was getting the royal treatment. The pilot flew his own plane from Florida to Baltimore so Keeva could be transported safely and comfortably to her new home. The pilot volunteers with Animal Rescue Flights, a group that normally transports rescued dogs and cats to new homes. So far, Keeva seems to be adapting fine to the move. She has not yet been put in with the other chimps, but she has had some contact with Abby and the other females. Mother and adoptive daughter seem to get along, and the other chimps have been keeping an eye on things, clearly curious about this youngster. Rottman, the worker at Keeva's new zoo, said that Keeva is watching the chimps a little more, and they spend a lot of their time watching her as well. Recently, Keeva made her first sound directed at her adoptive family. This is a good sign, especially since the other chimps answered her. Rottman says Keeva should be ready to fully join her new chimp family, and go on public display, in a couple of months.