Florida zoo adopts baby chimp Keeva is a baby chimpanzee. She was born March 12 to a female chimp at the Maryland Zoo in Baltimore. Keeva had a problem. Her mom, Carole, did not seem to be ready for the hard job of being a mother. Carole was not mean to Keeva. She was not trying to hurt her. The trouble was, she was not doing much of anything with her baby. She was not nursing her or bonding with her. So, Keeva is now living at the Lowry Park Zoo in Tampa, Florida. People took good care of Keeva at the zoo where she was born. They fed her and held her to make her feel loved and protected. The difference between the two zoos is that the Lowry Zoo has a chimp mom who has raised two adopted chimp babies. Her name is Abby. Sadly, there was no chimp who had done this in Baltimore. So when Keeva was 3 weeks old, she was flown to Tampa. One of the workers at the zoo where Keeva was born said that Keeva's mom, Carole, was a bit confused. She and her baby were just not connecting the way they should. It is rare for chimp mothers not to take good care of their babies. In the last 10 years, there have only been one or two cases of chimp moms at zoos that did not connect with their offspring. Carole was chosen as a chimp who would make a good mom. But when she had the baby, she was not doing the hard work it takes to be a mother. But Keeva is still a lucky chimpanzee. If this had happened in the wild, she probably would have died. After separating Keeva and Carole once, her keepers in Baltimore tried to put them together again. Maybe, they hoped, the separation had made Carole feel a little more like a mother. This plan did not go well. So the decision was made to look for a surrogate. A surrogate is someone who parents a child who is not their own. While Keeva was in Baltimore, her handlers took every step possible to make her think she was being raised by one of her fellow chimps. They held her all the time, wore fur clothes, groomed her and made chimp noises to her. On March 29, Keeva and two of her Baltimore handlers boarded a plane for Tampa. She may have been too young to realize it, but the 17-day-old chimp was getting a special treat. The pilot flew his own plane from Florida to Maryland so Keeva could be transported safely and comfortably to her new home. The pilot volunteers with a group called Animal Rescue Flights. Normally, the charity transports rescued dogs and cats to new homes. So far, Keeva seems to be taking to the move just fine. She has not yet been put in with the other chimps. However, she has met Abby and the other females through a screen. Mother and adoptive daughter seem to get along, and the other chimps have been keeping an eye on things. They are clearly curious about this new little one. A worker at Keeva's new zoo said that Keeva is watching the other chimps a little more, and they spend a lot of their time watching her. Recently, Keeva made her first sound directed at her adoptive family. This is a good sign, especially since the other chimps answered her. Keeva should be ready to fully join her new chimp family soon. People will be able to come visit her too.