Nowadays, whales and elephants have babies that are big and grow even bigger. Baby titanosaurs were about as big as human infants, and grew to be bigger than a school bus. WASHINGTON, D.C. — Do you think kids grow up fast? Scientists say one dinosaur baby went from tiny to tremendous a lot faster than that. At birth, titanosaur (tie-TAN-o-SORE) babies weighed about as much as a human baby. They weighed around 6 to 8 pounds. Then in just a few weeks, they were at least the size of a golden retriever. The titanosaurs weighed about 70 pounds. By the time the dinosaurs were about 20 years old, they were bigger than school buses. The dinosaurs grew faster than anything scientists had seen before, said Kristi Curry Rogers. She is a paleontologist at Macalester College in St. Paul, Minnesota. Paleontologists study how ancient creatures changed over time. She led a new study on the baby dinosaur bones. It was just published in Science, a magazine for scientists. To compare, whales, elephants and hippos are born much bigger than titanosaurs. Jeff Wilson is with the University of Michigan. He said this is one of the biggest mysteries about these dinosaurs: They started out as tiny eggs and ended up as the largest animals on the planet. Titanosaurs ate plants and lived about 67 million years ago. They grew to be 15 feet tall, not including their necks and heads. From head to tail they stretched about 50 feet long. Not long ago after a dig, Rogers looked at old bones stored in a museum. He found enough fossils to make a baby rapetosaurus (ruh-PAY-too-SORE-us). It is a kind of titanosaur. The baby dinosaur had starved to death during a drought that killed many others. They were pretty cute. They would have had a short snout, big eyes and a large head, like a puppy, said Luis Chiappe. He is the director of the Dinosaur Institute at the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles. He said the study was well done. These creatures hatched from eggs. They were pretty much ready to walk and live on their own, Rogers said. It would have been hard for the dinosaur parents to care for their babies. They had 20 to 30 softball-size eggs in a nest. When the dinosaurs hatched, it would have been hard for the adults to keep track of all the babies running around, Rogers said. It would have been crazy.