Nowadays, whales and elephants have babies that are big and grow even bigger. Baby titanosaurs were about as big as human infants, and grew to be bigger than a school bus. WASHINGTON, D.C. — Do you think kids grow fast? Scientists say one dinosaur baby went from tiny to tremendous in the blink of a prehistoric eye. At birth, titanosaur (tie-TAN-o-SORE) babies weighed about as much as an average human baby at 6 to 8 pounds. In just a few weeks, though, they were as heavy as golden retrievers, weighing about 70 pounds. Then by age 20 or so, they were bigger than a school bus. That jump from something that you could hold in your hands to one of the largest creatures ever to roam the Earth beats anything scientists have seen before, said Kristi Curry Rogers. She is a paleontologist at Macalester College in St. Paul, Minnesota, and studies how dinosaurs evolved and changed over time. She is the lead author of a new study on the baby dino fossils just published in the journal Science. By comparison, modern giants like whales, elephants and hippos are born much bigger than titanosaurs. Jeff Wilson of the University of Michigan said this is one of the biggest mysteries about this class of dinosaurs. They started out as tiny eggs and ended up as the largest animals on the planet. Titanosaurs are plant-eating dinosaurs that lived about 67 million years ago. They grew to be 15 feet tall, not including their necks and heads. From head to tail they could stretch out to about 50 feet. Looking through old bones stored in a museum after a dig in Madagascar, Rogers found enough small bone fossils to put together a rapetosaurus (Ruh-PAY-too-SORE-us), soon after it hatched. A rapetosaurus is a type of titanosaur. The baby dinosaur died of starvation during a drought that killed many others in the region, she said. And yes, you could call it cute. "There is no doubt that these baby titanosaurs would have had some of the features we would normally associate with cuteness or baby-ness: short snout, large eyes, big head for a body — like a puppy," said Luis Chiappe. He is the director of the Dinosaur Institute at the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles. He was not part of the research but he praised it. These creatures hatched from the egg pretty much ready to walk and live on their own, Rogers said. It would have been hard for the giant parents to care for their babies. They had 20 to 30 softball-size eggs in a nest. When they hatched, it would have been hard for the adults "to keep track of all the babies around their feet," Rogers said. "It was just a free-for-all."