Nowadays, whales and elephants have babies that are big and grow even bigger. Baby titanosaurs were about as big as human infants, and grew to be bigger than a school bus. WASHINGTON, D.C. — Do you think kids grow fast? Scientists say one dinosaur baby went from tiny to tremendous in the blink of an eye. At birth, titanosaur (tie-TAN-o-SORE) babies weighed about as much as average human babies. They weighed about 6 to 8 pounds. In just a few weeks, though, the baby dinos were at least the size of golden retrievers, about 70 pounds. By the time they were about 20 years old, they were bigger than school buses. That jump beats anything scientists have seen before, said Kristi Curry Rogers. She is a paleontologist at Macalester College in St. Paul, Minnesota, and studies how ancient creatures changed over time. She led a new study on the baby dino bones that was just published in Science, a magazine for scientists. By comparison, modern giants like whales, elephants and hippos are much bigger than titanosaurs when they are born. Jeff Wilson of the University of Michigan said this is one of the biggest mysteries about these dinosaurs. They started out as tiny eggs and ended up as the largest animals on the planet. Titanosaurs were plant-eating dinosaurs and lived about 67 million years ago. They grew to be 15 feet tall, not including their necks and heads. From head to tail they could stretch about 50 feet. After a dig, Rogers looked at old bones stored in a museum. He found enough fossils to make a baby rapetosaurus (Ruh-PAY-too-SORE-us), a type of titanosaur. The baby dinosaur died of starvation during a drought that killed many others in the region, she said. And yes, they were pretty cute. There is no doubt that these baby titanosaurs would have had some cute or babyish features. They would have had a short snout, big eyes and a large head, sort of like a puppy, said Luis Chiappe. He is the director of the Dinosaur Institute at the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles. He was not part of the study, but he praised it. These creatures hatched from the egg pretty much ready to walk and live on their own, Rogers said. It would have been hard for the giant parents to care for their babies. They had 20 to 30 softball-size eggs in a nest. When they hatched, it would have been hard for the adults "to keep track of all the babies around their feet," Rogers said. "It was just a free-for-all."