Paleontologists uncover new species of otter in China. Imagine an otter. You’ll probably think of a peaceful animal playing in the water. Otters are pretty adorable. It’s easy to forget that they also use rocks to smash open shell fish. Now, scientists have uncovered a fossil from an ancient wetland that shows the otter’s true nature. This big, new otter has a bit of a backstory. In 1983, paleontologists described what they thought was a new fossil otter. They called it Siamogale thailandica. The fossil scientists built their idea on a single tooth found in Thailand. A later study suggested that the tooth was more likely from a European badger. Even the discovery of more teeth did little to find out if this animal was an otter or a badger. Now, thanks to expeditions in China, scientists know that mammal's true identity. There is a wealth of fossils in the 6.2 million-year-old dirt of the Shuitangba coal mine in Yunnan, China. A team of Chinese and American scientists found parts of three skeletons of a new mammal they are calling Siamogale melilutra. A partly-crushed skull solves the longstanding riddle once and for all: Siamogale is definitely an otter, although a badger-ish one. The fossils show it was an otter and explain why scientists weren't sure what it was. Part of the back of the skull looks like an otter's skull, said Natural History Museum of Los Angeles paleontologist Xiaoming Wang and other scientists. The tooth from Thailand — the first piece of Siamogale thailandica found back in the 1980s — does look a bit like that of a badger's. The result is a bulky otter with a few hints of badger about it. “It has the skull of an otter but shares many dental similarities with badgers,” Wang said. That is why they are calling it melilutra, which is Latin for “badger-otter.” The scientists published their study in the Journal of Systematic Palaeontology. At the time Siamogale was alive, Shuitangba was a wooded wetland, says Denise Su. She is a paleoecologist from the Cleveland Museum of Natural History and a co-author of the paper. Paleoecologists study ancient habitats. At the time, the rest of the world was getting drier and colder, says Su. This might explain why the mammals of Shuitangba seem to be different from mammals found in other parts of the world. Shuitangba let some mammals from the Miocene era adapt to survive into the Pliocene era, Su says. The Miocene and Pliocene are both ancient time periods dating back millions of years, and used by scientists to refer to plants and animals that lived back then. In other words, this strange creature may have been a straggler from an earlier time. It was preserved thanks to a protected environment that stayed the same while the rest of the world changed. Putting together this broader picture was not easy. It also wasn't easy getting a good look at the badger otter itself. Siamogale melilutra is one of the best-preserved mammals from the Shuitangba site. However, Wang says it has been badly crushed. Scientist Stuart White spent months piecing together images of each piece to try to figure out what the otter must have looked like. What’s certain is that the new beast was a bulky one. It weighed about 110 pounds and was about the size of a wolf. The ancient otter is larger than all living otters,” Wang says. Although many meat-eating mammals grew larger to get bigger prey, Wang thinks Siamogale is large for a different reason. The mammal’s teeth hint that Siamogale was a mollusk eater, similar to modern sea otters, Wang said. Mollusks include animals like clams and mussels. Although sea otters use rocks to crack open their hard-shelled food, it’s unlikely Siamogale did. “Perhaps our fossil otter has not learned to use rocks,” Wang said. Instead, maybe it crushed the hard shells itself. More studies may answer this ancient puzzle. At least there is now more of the Siamogale melilutra to study than just a tooth.