Paleontologists uncover new species of otter in China. Otters are pretty cute animals. They are stronger than they look. They smash open shell fish with rocks. Then the otters eat them. Scientist have found an ancient fossil. A fossil is a naturally persevered remain of ancient life, like a dinosaur. The fossil shows a new kind of otter. An otter that lived a very long time ago. This new otter was pretty big and very strong. In 1983, scientists thought they found a new otter. This otter had been dead for many years. They based their idea on a tooth. It was found in Thailand, a country in Asia. Other scientists thought the tooth came from a badger. Scientists were confused. In China, there is an old coal mine called Shuitangba. Scientists found many fossils in it. The fossils are over 6 million years old. They found parts of three skeletons of a new animal. Its scientific name is Siamogale melilutra. One of the pieces is a skull. A part of it is crushed, but it solved the mystery.  Siamogale is definitely an otter, but also kind of like a badger. Melilutra means "badger-otter." It's from Latin, which is an old language. It has the skull of an otter, said Xiaoming Wang. He is a scientist at the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles. Its teeth are like a badger, Wang said. The badger-otter lived a very long time ago. It was about 6 million years ago. There were no humans. The time period was called the Miocene era. The rest of the world was drier and colder, says Denise Su. She is a scientist from the Cleveland Museum of Natural History. Shuitangba was a warm swamp with many trees. The animal may have survived later than other animals. The rest of the world changed, but its habitat stayed the same, Su said. Scientists didn't know what the animal looked like. Stuart White is a scientist. He made pictures of each fossil and put them together like a puzzle. Scientists know the animal was big. It weighed about 110 pounds. It was about the size of a wolf. The ancient otter is larger than all living otters, Wang says. Many mammals grew larger to get bigger prey. Wang thinks Siamogale is big for a different reason. Modern sea otters use rocks to crack open their food. Siamogale probably did not. Maybe the animal did not know how to use rocks, Wang said. Instead, maybe it crushed the shells itself. More studies may answer this mystery.