Earth's biological burglars see the light. Nature is full of thieves. Robber bees raid the hives of other bees and steal their honey. Some ants capture and enslave members of neighboring colonies. Large frigate birds swoop down on smaller seabirds and snatch the fish right out of their beaks. The sea slugs known as sacoglossans are some of the most remarkable burglars on the planet. The animals are about the length of a postage stamp or two. They feed on simple underwater plants known as algae. Algae have no stems, roots or leaves. However, they do contain green-colored chlorophyll, which plants use for photosynthesis. Photosynthesis is the way plants feed themselves. Plants take in sunlight and mix it with carbon dioxide and water to make food. Oxygen is also produced during photosynthesis. The plants do not need oxygen, however. They simply release it. It is then taken in by animals, who need oxygen to live. The part of the algae that contains chlorophyll is known as a chloroplast. It is shaped something like a jelly bean. Most slugs that eat algae quickly eat up the chloroplasts as well. Their bodies break down the chloroplasts right away, turning them into food. However, some kinds of slugs store the chloroplasts inside their bodies for weeks or months. The chloroplasts remain uneaten and turn the animals bright green. For many years, scientists thought they knew why these slugs were doing this. They believed the slugs were making themselves part plant. They thought the animals were feeding themselves through photosynthesis, using the chloroplasts inside them. The idea seemed to make a lot of sense. Experiments showed that these slugs can stay alive in a bright room for months with no food. Besides, why else would the little animals go to the trouble of saving the chloroplasts? A new study is making scientists completely rethink this idea, however. Scientist Sven Gould ran an experiment using six sacoglossans. None of the slugs were given any food at all for 55 days. Four slugs were given 12 hours of light followed by 12 hours of darkness each day. Two of those four slugs received a drug that prevented photosynthesis. The last two slugs lived in complete darkness for the whole time. At the end of the 55 days, all the slugs were still alive. They were all equally pale and all had lost about the same amount of weight. Their ability to stay alive did not depend on whether they could photosynthesize. Gould says it was exciting for scientists to think the slugs were "an animal slowly turning into plant.” However, his experiment proves that nothing like that is going on. Gould's theory is that the slugs are just doing something lots of animals do. They are saving some of the food they collect for times of hardship. Just like a squirrel buries nuts, they are storing chloroplasts inside themselves. Some sacoglossans sleep through the winter, or hibernate, after burrowing into the bottom of the ocean floor. Sunlight would not help them get through these long months underground. A stomach full of chloroplasts would, however. Gould thinks the slugs in his experiment used stored chloroplasts to stay alive. His theory explains how the animals made it through 55 days without being fed. It also explains why it made no difference how much light they got. Finally, it explains why all the slugs ended up equally pale. Once their bodies had used up the stored chloroplasts they stopped being bright green. It now seems that slugs do not use photosynthesis to feed themselves. However, they could be using the chloroplasts to get oxygen. The chloroplasts inside them could be behaving the way they would inside algae. If so, the slugs might be getting some extra oxygen. In turn, the chloroplasts might be getting carbon dioxide from the slug. Yet there is another possible explanation. In some studies baby slugs who are not exposed to algae for at least seven days, stop growing and die. The chloroplasts give young slugs energy and help them to grow cells. Maybe the slugs have evolved over many years. The chloroplasts now have an important job in the slugs' bodies. Without chloroplasts, maybe the slugs self-destruct.