Earth's biological burglars see the light. There is a colorful kind of sea slug called a sacoglossan. They are very unusual animals. Sacoglossans are about 1 inch long. They eat underwater plants known as algae. Algae have no roots or leaves, but they do have green chlorophyll in them. Plants use chlorophyll for something called photosynthesis. Photosynthesis is the way plants feed themselves. First, plants take in sunlight. Then they mix it with water and a gas called carbon dioxide. Together, it makes food. The part of the algae where chlorophyll is kept is called a chloroplast. It is shaped something like a jelly bean. Most slugs eat up chloroplasts with the rest of the algae. Their bodies break down the chloroplasts right away. The chloroplasts quickly get used up as food. Some kinds of slugs do something strange, though. They do not eat the chloroplasts. Instead, they store them inside their bodies. The chloroplasts stay in their bodies for weeks or months. Soon, they turn the little animals bright green. Scientists thought they knew why these slugs were doing this. They believed the slugs were making themselves into part plant. They thought the animals were feeding themselves through photosynthesis. Animals cannot make food out of sunlight and water on their own. Scientists thought the sea slugs were letting the chloroplasts do the work for them. A new study shows scientists have been wrong all along. Scientist Sven Gould ran a test on six sacoglossans. None of the slugs were given any food for 55 days. Some of the slugs had light for half the day. Others had no light at all. All the slugs were alive at the end of the 55 days. They were all healthy. But their color was different. Even the ones that had been kept in darkness were just fine. Gould says that means the slugs could not have been using photosynthesis to feed themselves. Photosynthesis cannot happen without light. Gould thinks these slugs are doing something many animals do. They are saving food for hard times. The slugs often sleep all winter on the floor of the ocean. There is no light there. Photosynthesis cannot happen there. It seems to be right. After the 55 days, the slugs were not bright green. Now they were pale. They had used the chloroplasts. Yet there is another possible reason. Some baby slugs need algae to grow. When they are away from algae for seven days they stop growing. Then the sea slugs die. Maybe the slugs have evolved over many years to need the chloroplasts. Without them, they might die.