Using genetics to explain bat wings Chiroptera, the order of mammals to which all bats belong, is a Greek word for "hand wing." It is a fitting name for animals that fly using elongated, webbed fingers. The evolutionary history of the wings of  bats — the only mammals with powered flight — has not been studied thoroughly. Now, new research provides the first comprehensive look at the genetic origins of their incredible wings. To appreciate the genetics of their wing development, consider how crazy a bat in flight truly looks. Try an experiment: Stick your arms out to the side, palms facing forward, thumbs pointing up toward the ceiling. Now imagine that your fingers are long, arching down toward the floor like impossibly dirty fingernails – but still made of bone, sturdy and spread apart. Picture the sides of your body connecting to your hands, a rubbery membrane attaching your leg and main part of your body to those long fingers, binding you with strong, stretchy skin. Finally, imagine using your muscles to flap those enormous hands. Bats, man. As marvelous as bat flight is to behold, the genetic origins of their storied wings has remained murky. However, new findings from an international team of researchers shed new light on how bats took a tetrapod blueprint for arms and legs and went to the sky 50 million years ago. Researchers looked not only at which genes were used in the earliest development of wings, but at what point during development the genes were turned on and off. They also examined what elements in the genome were regulating the expression of these genes. Genes do not just turn themselves on without input. Genetic switches, called enhancers, regulate the timing and levels of gene expression in the body. They determine whether and when a gene is activated to make the stuff that does the stuff. In studying the genetic blueprint of bat wings, scientists first sequenced the entire genome of a long-fingered bat found in eastern and southern Africa. The genome refers not just to genes themselves, but to all of the genetic information encoded in the DNA. Genes are the parts of DNA translated into protein, but there are also parts of the genome that play supporting roles as enhancers. Researchers used data and genomic analysis of bats at specific stages of development and looked at what parts of the genome were used, and when, to grow those big, flying hands. They found thousands of wing development genes as well as genetic switches that drive wing development. They also discovered that at these key developmental stages, there were major differences in activity between forelimbs and hind limbs. So how different are patterns of forelimb and hind limb development in bats, as compared with other mammals? The answer depends on how you look at the question. "On one level, a bat is using the same basic set of genes in its wings and hind limbs that a mouse [or person] uses. So on that level the two are very similar," said Stephen Schlebusch. He is a PhD student at the University of Cape Town in South Africa, and a co-leader of the research. "On the other hand, there aren't many major differences between the forelimb and hind limb of most mammals," Schlebusch said. "One might be larger or longer, but by and large they are fairly similar and their development follows a similar process. In comparison, a bat's limbs could hardly be more different." He was referring to the elongation in the wing, the presence versus absence of webbing, and the asymmetrical pattern of the wing versus the symmetrical hind limb. So where did these differences start to appear during development? Until a certain stage, bat forelimbs and hind limbs develop more typical of mammals, said Nadav Ahituv, PhD, of the University of California at San Francisco, and the co-leader of the research. Then, at specific points in development, the forelimbs go crazy and lose their balanced appearance, but the hind limbs stay normal, he said. Scientists haven't quite figured out exactly what makes a bat wing go wacky. "The limitation is that everything we find is potentially causative," Ahituv said. "We have a nice genomic blueprint of all the different factors that could potentially be causing the development of the wing."  Testing their findings to determine what genetic factors actually cause these tweaks gets a little more complicated. In a classic genetic experiment, scientists remove some genetic information from an organism – a living thing that can function on its own – and see if it results in the anticipated outcome. In this case, scientists might remove certain genes to see which were necessary for the key runaway forelimb development. That's not actually possible in bats, as they are not an animal model used in labs. "One thing that you can do is stick these sequences into mice and replace the mouse sequence for the bat sequence and see what happens in the mouse," Ahituv said. Researchers also plan to study bats more closely throughout the developmental process. They might follow the functional changes that occur as certain genes are expressed. The research also has implications for understanding human limb malformations. Humans can present a variety of limb malformations, including longer digits or webbing between them. By learning about the development of bat wings, scientists now have new tools to understand how some of these limb malformations occur. "By understanding how the bat does this, we can go and try to find in patients with limb malformations and maybe see how that same system might be used," Ahituv said. With this new understanding of how a baby bat grows its wings, scientists might be one step closer to shedding light on how human limb formation can go astray.