Using genetics to explain bat wings How the wings of bats have changed over time is not well known. Few studies have taken a close look at the evolution of bat wings. Now, a new study provides the first look at how their amazing wings developed. Consider how crazy a bat in flight truly looks. Try this experiment. Stick your arms out to the side, palms facing forward, thumbs pointing up toward the ceiling. Now imagine your fingers are long, arching down toward the floor like long, dirty fingernails. But they are still made of bone, sturdy and spread apart. Picture the sides of your body connecting to your hands. A rubbery membrane attaches to your leg and the main part of your body to those long fingers, binding you with strong, stretchy skin. Finally, imagine using your muscles to flap those enormous hands. Bats, man. The story of their wings is not clear. But new findings from scientists sheds some light on bat wings. The scientists studied which genes were used in the earliest stages of bat wings. Genes are a kind of building block. They help shape what people and animals will look like. Some parts of DNA turn genes on and off when we grow. They work like switches. The switches help build an animal's body plan. The scientists found the switches that turn genes on and off when the bats grow wings.  Scientists first sequenced the genome of a long-fingered bat found in Africa. The genome includes more than just genes. It includes all of the genetic information encoded in the DNA, like the switches. Scientists then studied different stages of bat wing growth. They looked at what parts of the genome were used, and when, to grow those big, flying hands. Scientists also found there were big differences between how bats' forelimbs and hind limbs developed compared to other animals. Bats are mammals, warm-blooded animals with backbones. They are the only mammals with powered flight. So how different are the ways bats' limbs developed compared with other mammals? A bat is using the same set of genes in its wings and hind limbs that a mouse or human uses, said Stephen Schlebusch of the University of Cape Town in South Africa. He worked on the study. He said in that way bats, humans and mice are very much alike. "On the other hand, there aren't many major differences between the forelimb and hind limb of most mammals," Schlebusch said. But a bat's limbs could hardly be more different. He was speaking of their long, webbed wings and their unbalanced pattern, and how they are different from their balanced hind limbs. So where did these differences start to appear? Until a certain stage, bat forelimbs and hind limbs develop much like other mammals. Then, at certain points, the forelimbs go crazy and lose their balanced appearance. But the hind limbs stayed much like other animals, said Nadav Ahituv. He is a scientist at the University of California at San Francisco.  Scientists have a genetic road map of the things that can change how a bat wing develops. But they can't figure out exactly what makes it go wacky. They can remove some genetic information and see what results. In this case, they might remove certain genes to see which were necessary for the unusual growth of bat wings. But that's not possible. Bats are not an animal model used in labs. Scientists also plan to study bats more closely. They might follow the changes that appear as certain genes are expressed. The study also could help explain how human limbs become misformed. Humans can have a number of limb malformations. People can grow exceptionally long fingers or webbing between them. By learning more about bat wings, scientists now have new tools to understand these human limb malformations.