Beardog bones shed light on carnivores' evolution For many years, an ancient jawbone sat in a drawer at The Field Museum, a natural history museum in Chicago, Illinois. Then a scientist who works at the museum opened the drawer and grew curious about the bone inside. Now, with help from another scientist, he has figured out that the jawbone fossil belonged to an animal known as a beardog. Fossils are the remains of animals and plants from long ago.  The beardog was an early relative of dogs, foxes and weasels. It went extinct, or died out completely, millions of years ago. The Field Museum fossil and another at the University of Texas represent a new genus of beardogs. A genus is one of the groupings into which scientists divide animals. It is a step higher than a species, and one step below a family. ## "Just Stumbled On These" These beardog fossils may teach us more about the evolution of dogs and other carnivores, or meat-eaters. Evolution is an idea, or theory, about the way that types of life have developed over the years. The fossils could also help scientists learn more about how animals adjust to changes in climate.  The two scientists are publishing a paper that says the jawbones belonged to two new types of beardogs. These beardogs were closely related to each other. Both types were very small, about the size of a Chihuahua.  One of the scientists is Susumu Tomiya. He works at The Field Museum. He spends a great deal of time taking care of the museum's large collection of fossils. "In my spare time I like to walk around the aisles in the collections and open up drawers," he said. "One day I just stumbled on these interesting-looking jaws of a little carnivore." ## Fossil Mystery Is Solved The fossil was first discovered in Texas in 1946\. Then, 30 years ago, it was identified as some type of carnivore. However, no one knew what type of carnivore it was, said Tomiya. His new paper solves this mystery. He wrote the paper with Jack Tseng of the State University of New York at Buffalo. The teeth in the jawbone stood out to Tomiya. They had flat surfaces for crushing that suggested their owners ate more than just meat. The animal might have eaten berries and bugs, too, like today's foxes. The teeth reminded Tomiya of beardog teeth, he said. However, the types of beardogs he knew about were much larger. They were the size of bears. These meat-eating predators once roamed parts of North America, Europe, Asia and Africa. Tomiya and Tseng compared the fossil to another jawbone at the University of Texas. They decided both should be grouped along with dogs, raccoons and weasels. Beardogs evolved alongside the ancient cousins of dogs, cats and bears. ## Beardogs Changed Over Time Over time, the small beardogs evolved into much larger beardogs, which needed more food and more space to live. Tomiya said other animals that went extinct evolved in similar ways. Beardogs vanished off the face of the planet 5 million to 10 million years ago, he said. Studying how beardogs changed over time could show patterns in carnivore evolution, he said. The small beardogs lived at a time of climate change in North America. The climate went from warm and wet to cool and dry. According to Tomiya, more study could help answer questions about what kinds of animals can adjust to climate change. The new study is interesting because the fossils were found in North America, said Steven Wallace. He teaches earth sciences at East Tennessee State University. Tomiya and Tseng's work is also a reminder that discoveries can come from anywhere. They don't always come from new digs in distant lands. "Sometimes the coolest discoveries come right out of a museum," Wallace said.