A lot of bears are walking around neighborhoods. People have gotten scared of the bears since a woman was badly hurt by one. It was the most serious bear attack in Florida's history. ORLANDO, Fla. — People used to be excited to see the black bears by their homes. Sure, more people were complaining. But the bears kept appearing. And that made for fun Facebook posts and interesting talk. No one had been badly hurt yet because of a bear. Experts told people that the bears would leave them alone. They just had to follow some simple rules. But all of that changed on Dec. 2. Susan Chalfant, 54, was hurt badly while walking her two small dogs. It was the most serious bear attack in Florida's history. Since the attack, people who live where bears roam say they are scared. They don't think the state is doing enough to protect them. David Simmons is in Florida's government. He said the bears are showing up where people have been living for a long time. He said it's not that people are moving into places where bears live. Bears are now moving to where people live. And that's causing problems. Nick Wiley is in charge of the Florida's wildlife agency. He said his workers have done a lot to protect people. He said his workers will kill a bear if it is not scared of people and trying to stay away from them. They don't like doing it, but "people come first,” he said. The agency plans to get more workers to trap bears. Then they can be moved to other places. Or the workers will catch and kill the bears. They are also asking people to make changes, like keeping their garbage cans locked and not feeding their pets outside. But people say the changes aren't helping. Inga Bateman had liked living among the black bears — even if it meant making some changes. She didn’t leave pet or bird food out. She got rid of her blueberry bushes. She planted thorny rose bushes to keep the bears away. Bateman, 56, loved telling friends about one Christmas Eve. A bear ate her children’s chocolate Santas when she left her car door open. But then a bear charged Bateman twice while walking her dogs. Now she is feeling less safe. The last time, she shut her door as the bear tried to get inside her home. She hit it on the nose with the door handle. After she closed the door, the bear started pounding on the windows. It finally walked away, leaving paw prints on the windows. Bateman got so scared that she had to go to the hospital. She had called 911. But, no one came. Bateman said, “I want them to take it more seriously.” Wiley said the state’s bear population was once “really in trouble.” But, it has gotten back to “more natural levels. ” That helps explain the sudden rise in people having problems with the bears. Florida’s struggle with bears is not unusual, said wildlife scientist John Beecham. Wildlife scientists from New Jersey to Colorado have reported more problems with black bears. Large animals have wandered into parks where children play. And they've been found on walking paths to schools. New Jersey and Georgia allow bear hunting as a way to lower the number of bears. However, bear hunting hasn't helped much to control the number of bears in Georgia. Bear hunting is not permitted in Florida. Wiley from the Florida wildlife agency says smart ways to deal with bear problems need to be found. “Asking about bear hunts I don’t think is the right question here.” 