More and more bears are walking through neighborhoods. One woman was attacked by a bear and got badly hurt. And a bear tried to get into the home of another woman. ORLANDO, Fla. — Until last week, people used to look at Florida black bears with wonder and fun. Sure, more people were complaining. But the big lugs kept appearing in Central Florida communities. And that made for fun Facebook posts and interesting talk. No one had been badly hurt yet because of a bear. State wildlife experts told people that the beasts would leave them alone, if people just followed some rules. All of that changed on Dec. 2. Susan Chalfant, 54, was walking her two small dogs when she was badly hurt by a bear. It was the most serious bear attack in Florida's history. Since the attack, people who live where bears roam have become afraid. Some question whether the state wildlife agency is doing enough to protect them. David Simmons is in Florida's government. His district has had the most bear problems in Florida during the past five years. He said wildlife officials need to think about dealing with the bears in a different way. He said that neighborhoods reporting problems with bears have been around a long time. They're not new ones that went up where bears lived. It’s not a case of humans moving into where bears live anymore, he said. It’s now a case of bears moving into human neighborhoods, he said. Nick Wiley runs Florida's wildlife agency. He said his agency has done a lot to control the bears. He said his workers will kill a bear if it is showing signs that it could be dangerous to humans. "If it’s lost its fear of people, not showing avoidance behavior, we’re going to have to take it," he said. "We don’t like doing that, but human safety comes first. People come first.” The agency plans to hire more workers to trap and relocate bears. Or to catch and kill them. Meanwhile, he said, state wildlife officers will continue to get people to take precautions. They'll ask people, “Are you willing to make a few sacrifices? Are you willing to have a bear-proof garbage can? Keep your garbage locked up? Keep your pet food inside? Are you willing to do a few things to help make sure that a bear doesn’t get in trouble or cause problems for you?” But people living near the bears are losing their patience. They say the precautions aren't helping. Inga Bateman had liked living among the black bears — even if it has meant making some changes. She doesn’t leave pet or bird food out, and got rid of her blueberry bushes. She planted thorny rose bushes to keep the bears at a safe distance. Bateman loved telling friends about one Christmas Eve. She left her car door open by accident. A bear ate her children’s stocking stuffers, which were chocolate Santas. But after a bear charged Bateman twice while walking her dogs, she is feeling less safe. The last time, she fought to shut her door as the bear tried to get inside her home. She hit it on the nose with the door handle. After she closed the door, the bear started pounding on her windows. It eventually walked away, but left paw prints on the windows. Bateman had to be hospitalized from the fright. She said she called 911. But no one came. Bateman, 56, said, “I want them to take it more seriously.” Wiley said the state’s bear population was once “really in trouble” but has rebounded to “more natural levels.” That helps explain the sudden rise in people having problems with the bears. Florida’s struggle with bears is not unusual, said wildlife scientist John Beecham. Wildlife scientists from New Jersey to Colorado have reported more problems with black bears. Large animals have wandered into parks where children play and along walking paths to schools. New Jersey and Georgia allow bear hunting as a way to control bear populations. However, bear hunting hasn't helped much to control the number of bears in Georgia. Bear hunting is not permitted in Florida. Wiley of Florida's wildlife agency says the state needs to find smarter ways to deal with bears coming into neighborhoods. “Asking about bear hunts I don’t think is the right question here.”