Earlier this month, a woman walking her pet dogs got mauled by a bear. It was the worst bear attack in Florida's history. There are too many bear encounters for comfort, people say. ORLANDO, Fla. — Until last week, Florida black bears were a source of awe and amusement to their suburban neighbors. Sure, bear complaints were rising. The big lugs made repeated appearances in areas throughout Seminole County and other Central Florida communities. This made for fun Facebook posts and interesting coffee talk. No one had experienced a life-threatening injury because of a bear. State wildlife experts regularly assured uneasy callers that the beasts would leave them alone if they followed some rules such as locking down their garbage. All of that changed Dec. 2, when Susan Chalfant, a 54-year-old resident of Wingfield North near Wekiwa Springs State Park was mauled while walking her two small dogs. A spokeswoman for Florida Fish &amp; Wildlife Conservation Commission called it the most serious documented bear attack in Florida history. Since the attack, residents of neighborhoods where bears roam frequently have been expressing frustration, and fear, at their repeated encounters with the bears. Some question whether the state agency is doing enough to protect them. State Sen. David Simmons, who represents the area where the most bear complaints in Florida have been lodged the past five years, agrees. He said it’s time for wildlife officials to reassess their tactics for managing bears. He pointed out that neighborhoods facing conflicts between humans and bears are long-established residential communities, not new developments that have gone up in places where bears live. “It’s not a case of humans encroaching on bears anymore,” he said. “It’s now a case of bears encroaching on humans.” Nick Wiley, executive director of the Florida Fish &amp; Wildlife Conservation Commission, said his agency is doing a lot, but he added that he’s open to taking a different approach. “It all connects back to bears seeing people as a source of food,” Wiley said in an interview. “They love an easy meal." He said his workers will euthanize, or kill, a bear if they see signs that the bear could be dangerous to humans. "If it’s lost its fear of people, not showing avoidance behavior, we’re going to have to take it," he said. "We don’t like doing that, but human safety comes first." Because of the attack, the agency plans to hire more wildlife contractors to trap and relocate bears, or catch and kill them. Meanwhile, he said, agency officers will continue to focus on asking that people take precautions. Hoping that people are willing to help, Wiley asks them if they will do a few things to avoid running into problems with bears. Ticking some of them off on his fingers, Wiley says he asks people, “Are you willing to have a bear-proof garbage can? Keep your garbage locked up? Keep your pet food inside? Are you willing to do a few things to help make sure that a bear doesn’t get in trouble or cause problems for you?” But people living in “bear central" are losing their patience, saying they have followed all the recommendations, with little to show for it. Inga Bateman has considered it a privilege to live among the black bears that roam near her home, and she took all the proper steps. She doesn’t leave pet or bird food out, got rid of her blueberry bushes, and planted thorny rose bushes to keep the mammals at a safe distance. Bateman used to love telling friends about what happened one Christmas Eve. After she accidentally left her van door open, a bear ate her children’s stocking stuffers which were chocolate Santas. But Bateman no longer feels carefree after a bear charged her twice while she was walking her dogs. In the most recent incident, she fought to shut her door as the bear tried to get inside her home, and even hit the bear on the nose with the door handle. After she closed the door, the bear started pounding on her windows but eventually walked away, leaving paw prints that are still on the windows. She says that called 911 and that no one came, though the call was referred to the Florida Wildlife Commission. Bateman said, "I want them to take it more seriously." A veteran of the wildlife agency, Wiley has seen the changes in the bear population. He joined the agency in 1988, and remembers when the state’s bear population was once “really in trouble.” But he said it has rebounded through conservation efforts to “more natural levels," which helps explain why there are more complaints. Florida’s struggle with bears is not unique, said John Beecham, a research biologist who specializes in human-bear conflicts. Wildlife biologists from New Jersey to Colorado, he said, have reported a jump in black bear complaints. In some cases, large animals wander during the day in parks where children play and along walking paths to schools. New Jersey is considering a law that would require the use of bear-resistant trash cans in “bear” neighborhoods and impose fines up to $1,000 for those who carelessly attract the animals. Bear hunting, which is not permitted in Florida, also is part of the strategy in New Jersey, where hunters killed 287 bears in 2012. Georgia has allowed hunting since the 1970s, limiting hunters to two harvested bears per season. But they said hunting has had a barely noticeable effect on the state’s growing black-bear population. The answer to Florida’s human-bear problem may be more complicated after the injuries to the woman. “I think we need to be looking for creative solutions on how to deal with these neighborhood bear situations,” said Wiley from Florida's Wildlife Commission. “Asking about bear hunts I don’t think is the right question here.”