More bears are roaming the neighborhoods. One woman got badly hurt in a bear attack, while another got charged twice while walking her dogs and a bear tried to enter her home. ORLANDO, Fla. — Until last week, Florida black bears were a source of awe and fun to their neighbors. Sure, bear complaints were rising. But the big lugs kept appearing in areas throughout Central Florida, which made for fun Facebook posts and interesting talk at coffee shops. No one had experienced a life-threatening injury because of a bear. State wildlife experts assured people that the beasts would leave them alone, if they followed some common sense rules. But all of that changed on Dec. 2, when Susan Chalfant, 54, was badly hurt while walking her two small dogs. A spokeswoman for the Florida Fish &amp; Wildlife Conservation Commission called it the most serious documented bear attack in Florida's history. Since the attack, people who live in neighborhoods where bears roam frequently have been expressing frustration and fear about the beasts. Some question whether the state agency is doing enough to protect them. So does state Sen. David Simmons, whose district includes the area where the most bear complaints in Florida have been lodged during the past five years. He said it’s time for wildlife officials to reassess what they do to manage the bears. He pointed out neighborhoods reporting problems with bears are in long-established communities. They're not new ones that went up where bears lived. So it’s not a case of humans moving into where bears live anymore, he said. It’s now a case of bears moving into human neighborhoods. Nick Wiley, the head of the Florida Fish &amp; Wildlife Conservation Commission, said his agency has done a lot to control the bears. But he added that he’s open to taking a different approach. He said his workers will kill a bear if it is showing the signs that it could be dangerous to humans. "If it’s lost its fear of people, not showing avoidance behavior, we’re going to have to take it. We don’t like doing that, but human safety comes first. People come first.” The agency plans to hire more workers to trap and relocate bears, or to catch and kill them. Meanwhile, he said state wildlife officers will try to get people to take some precautions, asking them, “Are you willing to make a few sacrifices?" Ticking off some of the suggestions, he said, "Are you willing to have a bear-proof garbage can? Keep your garbage locked up? Keep your pet food inside?" In other words, "Are you willing to do a few things to help make sure that a bear doesn’t get in trouble or cause problems for you?” he said. But people living near the bears are losing their patience, saying they've made changes with little to show for it. Inga Bateman has considered it a privilege to live among the black bears — even if it has meant making a few adjustments. She doesn’t leave pet or bird food out, and got rid of her blueberry bushes. She planted thorny rose bushes to keep the bears at a safe distance. Bateman used to love telling friends what happened one Christmas Eve. She'd accidentally left the van door open and a bear ate her children’s stocking stuffers, which were chocolate Santas. But after a bear charged Bateman twice while walking her dogs, she is feeling less carefree. In the most recent incident, she had to fight to shut her door as the bear tried to get inside her home. She even hit the bear on the nose with the door handle. After she closed the door, the bear started pounding on windows. It eventually walked away, but it left paw prints on the windows. Bateman, 56, who had to be hospitalized from the fright, said she called 911. But, no one came. She said, “I want them to take it more seriously.” Wiley has worked at the wildlife agency since 1988, and said the state’s bear population was once “really in trouble.” But, it has rebounded through conservation efforts to “more natural levels.” That helps explain the sudden increase in complaints. Florida’s struggle with bears is not unusual, said wildlife scientist John Beecham. Wildlife scientists from New Jersey to Colorado have reported a jump in black bear complaints. Large animals have wandered during daylight hours in parks where children play and along walking paths to schools. New Jersey and Georgia allow bear hunting as a way to control bear populations. However, bear hunting hasn't helped much to control the number of bears in Georgia. Bear hunting is not permitted in Florida. The answer to Florida’s human-bear problem may be more complicated after the injuries to the woman on Dec. 2. “I think we need to be looking for creative solutions on how to deal with these neighborhood bear situations,” said Wiley. “Asking about bear hunts I don’t think is the right question here.”