Beardog bones shed light on carnivores' evolution For many years an old jawbone sat in a drawer at The Field Museum in Chicago, Illinois. This museum is home to many ancient fossils. Fossils are the remains of animals and plants from long ago.  Susumu Tomiya is a scientist. He works at the museum. One day, he opened the drawer. He was curious about the jawbone. He teamed up with another scientist, Jack Tseng, to find out what animal it came from. Together, they realized it belonged to a beardog.  Beardogs vanished from the face of the planet long ago. They are related to dogs, foxes and weasels.  ## Studied A Similar Fossil Tomiya and Tseng studied the fossil from the museum. They also studied a similar fossil at the University of Texas. They say the fossils are from two new kinds of beardogs. Scientists had not known about these types before. The fossils could teach scientists more about the evolution of dogs and other animals. Evolution is an idea about how life has developed over the years. Now, the two scientists are publishing a paper. It says the jawbones belonged to small beardogs. They were about the size of a tiny dog.  ## The Teeth Stood Out The jawbone was found in Texas in 1946\. Scientists knew it came from a meat-eating animal. They didn't know what type, though. Tomiya and Tseng's paper solves this mystery. When Tomiya first saw the jawbone, the teeth stood out to him. They had flat tops. This showed that the animal didn't only eat meat. It might have eaten berries and bugs, too, like foxes do. The teeth reminded Tomiya of beardog teeth, he said. However, the jawbone was very small. He knew about only very big beardogs. They were the size of bears. They lived in North America, Europe, Asia and Africa. Now, Tomiya thinks beardogs started out small. Over many years, they evolved into bigger animals. They needed more food and space. Then they went extinct. They disappeared from the planet about 5 million to 10 million years ago, he said. ## Can Happen Anywhere The new study is interesting because the fossils were found in North America, said Steven Wallace. He is a professor at East Tennessee State University. He teaches earth sciences. Wallace said the study shows discoveries can happen anywhere. They don't always come from digging up new fossils.  "Sometimes the coolest discoveries come right out of a museum," he said.