Beardog bones shed light on carnivores' evolution For decades a fossilized carnivore jawbone sat in a drawer at Chicago's Field Museum, waiting to be rediscovered. Now the scientist who opened that drawer and grew curious about the fossil inside has determined, with help from a colleague, that the fossil belonged to an early, long-extinct relative of dogs, foxes and weasels. This relative is known as a beardog. The Field Museum fossil along with another at the University of Texas represent a new genus, which is one rank higher than a species in the classification of animals. These beardogs lived up to 40 million years ago. The researchers believe the beardogs may eventually tell the world more about the evolution of dogs and other carnivores and how animals adapt to changes in climate. ## Found In A Museum Drawer According to a paper published recently in the journal Royal Society Open Science, the jawbones belonged to two closely related types of Chihuahua-sized beardogs. The new genus names are Gustafsonia and Angelarctocyon. The Field Museum fossil set off the study by researcher Susumu Tomiya, who works at the museum and spends much time taking care of its large collection of fossils. "In my spare time I like to walk around the aisles in the collections and open up drawers," he said. "One day I just stumbled on these interesting-looking jaws of a little carnivore." ## First Discovered In Texas The fossil was discovered in Texas in 1946 and 30 years ago was loosely classified as some type of carnivore. But no one knew where it fit into the carnivore family, said Tomiya, who authored the paper with Jack Tseng of the State University of New York at Buffalo. The fossil's teeth stood out to Tomiya. They had flatter surfaces for crushing that suggested their owners ate more than meat — maybe berries and bugs, too, like present-day foxes. The teeth reminded Tomiya of beardogs he was familiar with, he said, but the types of beardogs he knew were much larger predators. They were the size of a bear and once roamed parts of North America, Europe, Asia and Africa. ## Studying Evolutionary Paths The researchers also compared the fossil with one written about in an earlier paper at the University of Texas. Tomiya and Tseng concluded both fossils belonged in what had essentially been a blank spot in the branch of the mammalian tree that includes dogs, raccoons and weasels. Beardogs evolved alongside the ancient cousins of present-day dogs, cats, bears and other carnivores. The evolution of beardogs from the small varieties classified by Tomiya and Tseng to the much larger animals that needed more food and habitat seems to match evolutionary paths of other animals that led to extinction, Tomiya said. Beardogs were extinct by 5 million to 10 million years ago, he said. Studying how the diversity of beardogs grew and shrank over time could tell us about larger patterns in carnivore evolution, he said. The two kinds of small beardogs also lived at a time of climate transition in North America. The climate was undergoing a change from subtropical — warm and wet — to cooler and relatively dry. Further study could help answer questions about what kinds of animals adapted well to that change, Tomiya said. ## "The Coolest Discoveries" The new research is interesting in part because the fossils were found in North America, said Steven Wallace. He is a geosciences professor at East Tennessee State University and curator at the East Tennessee Natural History Museum. Beyond that, Tomiya and Tseng's work is a reminder to scientists that discoveries don't just come from fresh digs in far-flung locales. "It's almost like they feel that once a specimen's been described, they've learned everything they can from it," Wallace said. "Sometimes the coolest discoveries come right out of a museum."