Beardog bones shed light on carnivores' evolution For decades a fossilized jawbone sat in a drawer at Chicago's Field Museum, waiting to be found again. Now the scientist who opened that drawer and grew curious about the fossil inside has determined, with help from a fellow scientist, that the fossil belonged to a beardog. The beardog was an early relative of dogs, foxes and weasels that went extinct long ago. The Field Museum fossil along with another at the University of Texas represent a new genus, which is one level higher than a species in the animal classification system. These beardogs lived up to 40 million years ago. The researchers believe the beardogs may eventually tell the world more about the evolution of dogs and other carnivores, or meat-eaters. Evolution is the process by which types of life have developed over many, many years. The fossils may also help scientists understand how animals adapt to changes in climate. ## The Size Of A Chihuahua According to a paper published recently in a science journal, the jawbones belonged to two closely related types of beardogs. Both types were very small, about the size of a Chihuahua. The new genus names are Gustafsonia and Angelarctocyon. The Field Museum fossil inspired the new study by researcher Susumu Tomiya. He works at the museum and spends much time taking care of its large collection of fossils. "In my spare time I like to walk around the aisles in the collections and open up drawers," he said. "One day I just stumbled on these interesting-looking jaws of a little carnivore." The fossil was discovered in Texas in 1946\. Then, 30 years ago, it was loosely classified as some type of carnivore. But no one knew where it fit into the carnivore family, said Tomiya, who authored the paper with Jack Tseng of the State University of New York at Buffalo. ## Teeth Drew His Attention The teeth stood out to Tomiya. They had flatter surfaces for crushing that suggested their owners ate more than meat. The animal might have eaten berries and bugs, too, like present-day foxes. The teeth reminded Tomiya of beardogs he was familiar with, he said. But the types of beardogs he knew were much larger predators. They were the size of a bear and once roamed parts of North America, Europe, Asia and Africa. The researchers also compared the fossil with one written about in an earlier paper at the University of Texas. Tomiya and Tseng concluded that both fossils belonged in the branch of the mammal tree that includes dogs, raccoons and weasels. The fossils would fill a blank spot in this branch. Beardogs evolved alongside the ancient cousins of present-day dogs, cats, bears and other carnivores. ## Extinct Millions Of Years Ago The evolution of the small, newly named beardogs to much larger beardogs, which needed more food and space, seems to match evolutionary paths of other animals that have since gone extinct, Tomiya said. Beardogs were extinct by 5 million to 10 million years ago, he said. Studying how the diversity of beardogs changed over time could show patterns in carnivore evolution, he said. The two kinds of small beardogs also lived at a time of climate change in North America. The climate went from warm and wet to cooler and relatively dry. More study could help answer questions about what kinds of animals adapted well to that change, Tomiya said. ## "Right Out Of A Museum" The new research is interesting in part because the fossils were found in North America, said Steven Wallace. He is an earth sciences professor at East Tennessee State University and a curator at the East Tennessee Natural History Museum. Beyond that, Tomiya and Tseng's work is a reminder that discoveries don't come only from fresh digs in far-flung places. "It's almost like they feel that once a specimen's been described, they've learned everything they can from it," Wallace said. "Sometimes the coolest discoveries come right out of a museum."