Never before has a virus carried by pollen spread like this through bees and hives. The tobacco ringspot virus was previously only found in plants. LOS ANGELES — A previously unknown reason for the rapid dying off of honeybee colonies has been discovered: A deadly virus has spread from plants to the bees. Tobacco ringspot virus (TRSV) is a pathogen — a micro-organism that causes disease. It is spread by pollen and is known to damage soy crops. It was previously only found in plants. But now, a new study reports, it has been discovered in honeybees. The virus was shown to be growing inside honeybees who act as hosts. And it is spreading to varroa mites, tiny creatures that live on bees. These mites in turn are passing the disease from bee to bee. Never before has a virus carried by pollen spread like this through bees and hives. Traces of the virus were found in every part of the bee examined, except its eyes. Honeybee colonies are extremely important to the multibillion-dollar farming industry. Bees pollinate about 90 crops worldwide. Pollination is the process by which pollen is carried from the male to the female parts of plants. This transfer allows plants to reproduce — without it, there could be no new plants. But bee colonies have been collapsing. Scientists have identified several causes: a deadly mix of pathogens, various pesticide sprays used to protect crops, and beekeeping practices that weaken the bees' resistance to disease. Only about 5 percent of plant viruses are known to be transmitted by pollen. Even fewer have been known to jump from plants to insects. That they can provides one more reason for bee colony collapse disorder, as the rapid dying off is known. TRSV mutates, or changes its structure, very quickly. This allows it to get past the host’s immune response — that is, the attempt of the bee's body to fight off the virus. “They have a high mutation rate,” said Yan Ping Chen, the lead author of the study. “Because of their genetic diversity, we see a lot of host jumping.” In other words, a lot of quick movement from one host to another. Just how much the new virus is responsible for the death of colonies is unknown. It would be difficult, Chen said, to separate it from other things threatening the health of bee colonies. “I want to be cautious,” Chen said. “The cause of colony collapse disorder remains unclear." But there is evidence that TRSV is linked to lower rates of bees surviving through the winter. Indeed, the new virus was found in many colonies considered to be “weak.” And infection rates rose to a 22.5 percent high in winter, the study found. Varroa mites also were found to carry the virus, but were not infected themselves. This led scientists to conclude that they helped spread the virus within the colony. Scientists are still uncertain how the virus behaves. It's not clear if the infection would continue without the bees picking up more of the virus from plants they visit. It is also unknown whether the infected bees can spread the virus to healthy plants. “I’d be hesitant to proclaim that this virus is the cause of colony collapse," said scientist Randy Oliver. "But it certainly shows the degree of our lack of understanding" of bee infections. Several other possible causes of bee colony collapse have been identified. Pesticides known as neonicotinoids, which have been banned in Europe, are one possible cause. A study last year linked them with the spread of viruses in bees. Another study found 35 pesticides and fungicides in the pollen collected from bees. Some of these chemicals were found at fatally high levels. A separate study last year looked at bees fed with high-fructose corn syrup instead of their own honey. The study found that this diet weakened the bees' immune system. They became less resistant not only to disease, but also to the effects of pesticides. Last year, the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the Environmental Protection Agency issued a report together that listed the major causes of colony collapse: pesticides, pathogens, and inadequate nutrition. The last is due in part to the increasing scarcity of certain wild flowers that have pollen the bees like to feed on.