It is called tobacco ringspot virus. It has jumped from plants to the bees, then to the mites on bees. And the mites are spreading it from bee to bee. LOS ANGELES — A study published this Tuesday has identified a previously unknown factor contributing to the collapse of honeybee colonies: A virus has spread from plants to the bees. Tobacco ringspot virus (TRSV) is a pathogen — that is, a disease-causing microorganism. It is carried by pollen and is known to damage soy crops. Though previously only associated with plants, it was recently discovered in bees. The virus was shown to be growing inside honeybees who act as hosts. And it is spreading to varroa mites, tiny creatures that live on bees. These mites in turn are passing the disease from bee to bee. This is the first time that honeybees have been infected by a virus carried by pollen that spread so thoroughly through bees and hives. Traces of the virus were detected in every part of the bee examined, except its eyes. Honeybee colonies are vital to the multibillion-dollar agricultural industry. Commercially cultivated bees pollinate about 90 crops worldwide, a business valued at $14 billion annually. Pollination is the process by which pollen is transported from the male to the female parts of plants. This transfer allows for plant fertilization and reproduction, so that new plants can be made. But bee colonies have been collapsing. Scientists have attributed that devastation to various factors: a deadly mix of pathogens, pesticides sprayed on crops that can kill bees, and beekeeping practices that weaken the bees' resistance to disease. Only about 5 percent of plant viruses are known to be transmitted by pollen. Even fewer have been known to jump from plants to insects. That they can adds a complicated layer to the forces driving bee colony collapse disorder, scientists warned. TRSV mutates, or changes its structure, very quickly. This allows it to sidestep the host’s immune response — that is, the attempt of the bee's body to fight off the virus. “They have a high mutation rate,” said Yan Ping Chen, an expert in bee diseases and lead author of the study, which was published online in the journal mBio. “Because of their genetic diversity, we see a lot of host jumping.” Just how big a role the virus has been playing in the death of colonies is unknown. It would be difficult, Chen said, to separate it from other factors threatening the health of bee colonies. “I want to be cautious,” Chen said. “The cause of colony collapse disorder remains unclear." But he said there is evidence that TRSV and other viruses are linked with lower rates of survival of the bees through the winter. Indeed, the new virus was found in many colonies considered to be “weak.” And infection rates rose to a 22.5 percent high in winter, according to the study. Varroa mites also were found to carry the virus, but were not infected themselves. This led researchers to conclude that they aided the spread of the virus within the colony. Researchers are still uncertain how the virus behaves. It's not clear if the infection would persist without the bees picking up more of the virus from plants they visit. It is also unknown whether the infected bees can spread the virus to healthy plants. “I’d be hesitant to proclaim that this virus is the cause of colony collapse," said Randy Oliver, a biologist and beekeeper. "But it certainly shows the degree of our lack of understanding" of bee diseases. Several other possible causes of bee colony collapse have been identified. One possible cause is a class of pesticides known as neonicotinoids, which have been banned in Europe. A study last year linked them with lowered resistance to disease and the spread of viruses in bees. Another study found 35 pesticides and fungicides in the pollen collected from bees servicing major food crops. Some were at fatally high levels. A separate study last year looked at bees fed with high-fructose corn syrup instead of their own honey. The study found that this diet weakened the bees' immune system. They became less resistant not only to disease, but also to the effects of pesticides. Last year, the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the Environmental Protection Agency issued a joint report that listed the major identified causes of colony collapse: pesticides, pathogens, and inadequate nutrition. The last is due in part to the increasing scarcity of certain wild flowers that have pollen bees like to feed on.