The virus was discovered recently. It may be one of the reasons why bee colonies are dying off. It's a serious problem because bees are very important to farming. LOS ANGELES — In the United States and Europe, honeybee colonies have been dying off. Now, scientists have discovered a deadly virus that has spread from plants to bees. Tobacco ringspot virus (TRSV) is a pathogen — a microorganism that causes disease. It is spread by pollen. It is known to damage soy crops. Previously, TRSV was only found in plants. But now it has been discovered in honeybees. The virus is growing inside honeybees. It is also spreading to varroa mites. These tiny creatures live on bees, like little vampires. And they are passing the disease from bee to bee. Traces of the virus were found in almost every part of a bee scientists looked at. Only its eyes were not infected. Honeybee colonies are very important to farming. Bees pollinate about 90 crops worldwide. Pollination is the spreading of pollen from the male to the female parts of plants. It allows plants to reproduce. Without it, there would be no new plants. So without bees, many crops would die out. But bee colonies have been collapsing. Scientists have identified several causes. Besides pathogens, pesticides have contributed. They are chemicals sprayed on plants to kill bugs or weeds. Some practices by beekeepers have also been harmful. Only about 1 out of every 20 plant viruses are spread through pollen. Even fewer jump from plants to insects. But now it appears that TRSV can. This provides one more reason for the dying off of bee colonies. TRSV mutates, or changes, very quickly. This allows it to get around a bee's immune system. In other words, it can slip through a bee's defenses against disease. Just how much the virus is responsible for the death of colonies is unknown. But the new virus has been found in many colonies considered to be "weak." Varroa mites also were found to carry the virus. However, they were not infected themselves. This suggests that they helped spread the virus within the colony. Scientists are still uncertain how the virus behaves. They are not sure what would happen if bees stopped picking up the virus from new plants. Would the infection die out? And, they wonder, can infected bees spread the virus to healthy plants? TRSV is probably not the only cause of colony collapse. There are several other possible explanations. A type of pesticide is one possible cause. A study last year linked it with the spread of viruses in bees. Another study found 35 pesticides and fungicides in the pollen collected from bees. Some were at dangerously high levels. A study last year looked at bees fed with high-fructose corn syrup. Many beekeepers take all the honey the bees make and give them high-fructose corn syrup to eat instead. This seems to weaken the bees' immune system. That makes it harder for them to fight off disease. And pesticides affect them more strongly. Scientists have also identified another reason for bee colony collapse: Bees do not get enough of what they need to be healthy. Too many of their favorite wildflowers are disappearing.