Previously associated only with plants, tobacco ringspot virus was recently found in honeybees. It's the first report of bees becoming infected by a virus transmitted by pollen. LOS ANGELES — A rapidly mutating virus has spread from plants to bees, and is contributing to the collapse of honeybee colonies vital to the agricultural industry, according to a study published online Tuesday in the journal mBio. Tobacco ringspot virus (TRSV) is a pathogen — that is, disease-causing microorganism. It is carried by pollen and causes disease in soy crops. Though previously only associated with plants, it was recently found in honeybees during routine screening at a U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) laboratory. Further study revealed that the virus was replicating inside its honeybee hosts, and spreading to mites, tiny parasites similar to ticks. These mites live on bees and travel from bee to bee, thereby spreading the disease. The discovery is the first report of honeybees becoming infected by a virus transmitted by pollen that spread systematically through bees and hives. Traces of the virus were detected in every part of the bee examined, except its eyes. Commercially cultivated bees pollinate about 90 crops worldwide, a business valued at $14 billion annually. Pollination is the process by which pollen is transported from the male to the female parts of plants, allowing for plant fertilization and reproduction. But bee colonies have been collapsing. Scientists have attributed that devastation to a deadly cocktail of pathogens, as well as pesticides and beekeeping practices that stress the insect’s immune system. Only about 5 percent of plant viruses are known to be transmitted by pollen. Fewer still have been known to jump from the plant kingdom to insects. That they can adds a complex layer to the forces driving colony collapse, scientists warned. The tobacco ringspot virus mutates, or changes its structure, quickly enough to subvert the host’s immune response. “They have a high mutation rate,” said Yan Ping Chen, a bee pathologist and lead author of the study. “Because of their genetic diversity, we see a lot of host jumping.” Just how big a role the new virus has been playing in the death of colonies is unknown. It would be difficult, Chen said, to separate it from a mix of pathogens and stresses hurting the bees. “I want to be cautious,” Chen said. “The cause of colony collapse disorder remains unclear. But we do have evidence that TRSV, along with other viruses that we screen on a regular basis, are associated with lower rates of over-winter survival.” Indeed, the new virus, along with the Israeli Acute Paralysis Virus, was linked with colonies considered “weak” due to a variety of stresses. It also showed a similar seasonal fluctuation. Infection rates rose to a 22.5 percent high in winter, according to the study. Varroa mites, a “vampire” parasite, also were found to carry the virus but were not infected. This led researchers to conclude that they aided the spread of the virus within the colony. The mites' exact role in spreading the virus, however, remains to be studied. Researchers also are uncertain about whether the infection persists without the bees picking up more of the virus from the plants they visit. It is also unclear whether the infected bees can spread the virus to otherwise healthy plants. “I’d be hesitant to proclaim that this virus is the cause of colony collapse," said Randy Oliver, a biologist and beekeeper. "But it certainly shows the degree of our lack of understanding of the complexity of bee pathogen interactions.” Several other possible causes of bee colony collapse have been identified. Activists have raised concern about a type of pesticide known as neonicotinoids, which have been banned in Europe. A study last year linked that pesticide with suppressed immune response and increased reproduction of viruses in bees. Another study found 35 pesticides and fungicides, some at fatal levels, in the pollen collected from bees servicing major food crops. But that study found neonicotinoids only on pollen from a single apple orchard. A separate study last year looked at bees fed with high-fructose corn syrup, which many commercial beekeepers now feed to bees instead of their own honey. It found that this diet weakened the bees' immune system and made them less resistant to the effects of pesticides. Last year, USDA and Environmental Protection Agency scientists listed what research has shown to be the major causes of colony collapse: pesticides, pathogens, and inadequate nutrition, in part caused by the diminishing availability of certain wild flowers whose pollen bees like to eat.