Bees are smart despite tiny brains Bees have tiny brains, but they are surprisingly intelligent. Researchers at Queen Mary University of London have conducted an experiment showing that bees can learn from their environment to gain a reward, and then teach other bees to do the same. And that’s not all they can do. The study was published Thursday in the journal Science. “I think the most important result in our case was that bumblebees can not just copy others but they can improve upon what they are learning,” said Olli Loukola, one of the authors of the study. “This is of course amazing for small-brained insects." Loukola explained that even for humans, "it’s difficult to improve on something when we are copying others.” In the experiment, the bees had to move a yellow ball into the center of a platform after the scientists showed the bees how to do it. Some bugs saw the ball move as though on its own, with researchers secretly moving it from below with a magnet. For other bees, the scientists moved the ball with a plastic bee on a stick. When the ball reached the center, the scientists added sugar water as a reward. ## Bees Are Highly Motivated By Rewards The bees learned that the rewards arrived when the ball was put in the right place. After doing more trials, the bugs began to move the balls by themselves. The team then placed the trained bees on a platform with new bees. After observing the trained bees once, the untrained ones started to carry out the task, too. And not only did they copy the behavior, but the new recruits also improved on the action: They chose balls closer to themselves, even if the demonstrator bee picked a ball that was farther away. “These are high, high, highly intelligent creatures," said conservation biologist Reese Halter. He explained that even though bees have far fewer neurons than humans, they use them very efficiently. Neurons are the parts of your brain that let you think. Halter explained that bees communicate through head-butting, jostling each other and dancing. ## (Brain) Size Doesn't Matter Lars Chittka is a behavioral ecologist who runs the lab where the research took place. He studies animal behavior and is an expert on insects. He authored a study in 2009 about bee brains called “Are Bigger Brains Better?” The paper concluded that even small brains can be highly complex. Researchers in his lab have also shown that bees are smart enough to pull fake flowers out of narrow slots by strings in order to access sugar in them. Loukola explains that, in the past, the scientific community has sometimes assumed that the smaller the brain, the less intelligent the species. He said this study proves that assumption wrong.  Other research supports the idea of advanced bee intelligence. A 2014 study in the journal Animal Cognition found that bees could learn more difficult tasks to access sugar. For example, bees can learn to slide or lift caps, then push balls to access the reward. The balls weighed more each time. When the researchers put the bees who knew how to solve the puzzle in a hive with bees who didn't, they somehow went on to communicate the solution to the other bees.