Tagged belugas give researchers plenty of surprising data. ANCHORAGE, Alaska — Beluga whales off Alaska's northern coast target Arctic cod for food and will dive to great depths to reach them. Information collected over 15 years provides a look into how they hunt for food in the region. Scientists say the information is important as the area experiences climate change and loss of sea ice. Researchers studied two U.S. Arctic Ocean beluga populations in the Chukchi and Beaufort seas. They found that they dive as deep as 900 meters, or more than 2,950 feet. Scientists have had limited information on the diet and behavior of the two whale populations. The new study adds to that body of knowledge. In the situation of a changing Arctic with melting sea ice and increased pollution, it's "important to get some benchmarks and some baseline information," study author Donna Hauser said. She is a doctoral student at the University of Washington, and studies sea life. Belugas are small, toothed whales that are born gray, then turn white as they age. They have distinctive, bulbous structures on the forehead. Their thick blubber layer can be up to 5 inches thick. Male belugas grow as long as 15 feet and females to 12 feet. They feed on salmon, crab, shrimp, squid, clams and small schooling fish such as herring and cod. They are hunted by Alaska Native subsistence hunters. Subsistence hunters seek food and use all parts of the animal, even blubber. This type of hunting is popular in rural Alaska. Alaska has five populations of beluga whales. Two spend winters in the Bering Sea, and when sea ice melts they head through the Bering Strait into the Chukchi or Beaufort seas. During the study, researchers applied tags that are linked to satellites to the whales. When tagged belugas surfaced to breathe, the tags would give locations and dive depths. Hauser and other researchers looked at information collected from 30 whales tagged over 15 years from 1997 to 2012\. One whale retained a tag for 18 months. Polar bears and Pacific walrus need sea ice as a platform for hunting. Beluga whales can move around it. The researchers tracked belugas into feeding areas that were once covered year-round with sea ice. They were trying to learn where the whales go on their long migrations. Hauser and other researchers did not have much information about the diet of belugas in the Arctic Ocean. Still, they checked information from the tags with information they had on the location of schools of Arctic cod. They found a match.  The whales likely made dives based on where prey was concentrated by underwater features such as undersea slopes from shallow to deep water, Hauser said. The whales commonly dove 650 to 1,000 feet. The researchers found that there was a relation. The Chukchi were diving where the Arctic cod were most abundant, she said. The tags attached to the belugas could record dives to 1,000 meters, or 3,280 feet. One male beluga dove to 956 meters, or more than 3,100 feet, in the Canada Basin. The basin reaches depths of more than 10,000 feet. Researchers don't know why belugas would dive so deep there, Hauser said. The research was published in the scientific magazine Marine Ecology Progress Series in December.