Protective measures aren't helping beluga whales come back. ANCHORAGE, Alaska — Belugas are white whales. Tourists in Alaska often hope to catch a glimpse of the rare creatures. One group of beluga whales lives in Alaska's Cook Inlet. These belugas are endangered. That means there are not very many left.   Cook Inlet starts in the Gulf of Alaska and reaches Anchorage. Anchorage is Alaska's biggest city. Scientists have been trying to help the endangered beluga whale. Their efforts have not yet paid off. Now, they are going to study why.   Mandy Keogh studies wildlife in Alaska. She is not sure why there are still so few beluga whales. Thirty years ago there were over 1,300 belugas. Now there are only 340 left in Cook Inlet. Between 1994 and 1998 many whales were hunted for food. Hunting ended in 1999\. It is now against the law to hunt beluga whales.  Belugas have a mixed diet. They eat salmon, smaller fish, crab, shrimp, squid and clams. The whales are noisy. They whistle, grunt and click.  Scientists are studying the belugas in new ways. They want to know why the whales are not making a comeback. Is it something they are eating? Is it their social life? Is it noise in the ocean? One new study will look at beluga whale teeth. They can learn about what the whale ate.  Mat Wooller studies the teeth. He says they are like tree rings. When a tree is cut down, the rings show information, like the age of the tree. Wooller says the whales' teeth are similar. You can see their growth and tell when things changed. Scientists will also listen for sounds of killer whales. They might be predators. Noise from machines could also scare belugas away from feeding areas. The social life of whales is important, too. Scientists will compare these whales with other belugas in Alaska. Another beluga population has been growing.  The state of Alaska cares about the beluga population. Belugas attract tourists.  Cook Inlet has other important natural resources. Companies are drilling for oil there. Alaska has rules about drilling. The rules are meant to protect the environment. If the rules are not helping the beluga whales, Alaska might get rid of them.  Wildlife expert Mandy Keogh thinks learning more about the beluga whales is important. If the experts do not know why the whales are in trouble, they cannot help. Keogh says the new studies could change that.