Judge says beluga whales will stay put. ATLANTA, Ga. — Eighteen beluga whales were captured in Russia. The Georgia Aquarium asked to bring them into the United States. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) is a government department. It is in charge of the oceans. It also gives aquariums permission to bring in marine animals. NOAA told the aquarium it could not bring in the whales. Then the aquarium went to court. It asked a judge to let it bring in the whales. That was in 2013. This week, a judge said no. The 18 belugas are from the Sea of Okhotsk. The sea is in northern Russia. They were collected by scientists in 2006, 2010 and 2011. They now live in the Utrish Marine Mammal Research Station. It is in Russia. The Georgia Aquarium wanted to be home to some of the whales. Others were to be sent to aquariums in Chicago, Illinois, and Connecticut. Three SeaWorld parks planned to take some whales. SeaWorld decided later that it no longer wanted them. American law says that marine animals cannot be caught in the United States. Americans are not allowed to catch them anywhere. Also, most marine animals cannot be brought to the United States. They can come to aquariums only. Whales are not allowed to come if their pod would suffer. A pod is a group of whales. The aquarium had to show that the other whales would be OK. NOAA said the aquarium did not prove that. It also said allowing the whales into the United States would be bad for whales in Russia. More whales could be captured from the same area. People might capture the whales to sell them. NOAA also said that some of the whales were too young when they were caught. It says they were still with their mothers. The aquarium did not agree. It said NOAA did not have a good reason to turn it down. It said the whales were not too young. The aquarium also said that there would be no bad effect on the other whales. Judge Amy Totenberg said that NOAA followed the law. She decided the aquarium could not bring in the whales. It could try to bring in different whales another time. It would have to follow the law.