Tagged belugas give researchers plenty of surprising data. ANCHORAGE, Alaska — Beluga whales off Alaska's northern coast target cod for food. They will dive very deep to reach them. Scientists collected information over 15 years about how belugas search for food. The area is experiencing climate change and losing sea ice. Studying belugas may help to understand those changes. Scientists studied two groups of beluga in the Chukchi and Beaufort seas. They found that they can dive more than 2,950 feet. Scientists have limited information on what the two groups of whales eat. They do not know much about how they behave either.  As humans change the area and sea ice melts, it is important to gather information, said Donna Hauser. She is studying to become a professor at the University of Washington. She wrote the study. Belugas are small, toothed whales. They are born gray and turn white as they age. They have bulbous shapes on their forehead. Thick blubber keeps them warm in cold water. The blubber can be as much as 5 inches thick. Male belugas grow as long as 15 feet and females can grow to 12 feet. They feed on different fish and shellfish. They are hunted by Alaska Native subsistence hunters. Subsistence hunters seek out food to survive. They use all parts of the animal, even the blubber.  Alaska has five groups of beluga whales. Two of them spend winters in the Bering Sea. When sea ice melts they head through the Bering Strait into the Chukchi or Beaufort seas. During the study, scientists put tags on the whales to track them. When tagged belugas came up to breathe, the tags would tell where and how deep they were. The tags sent signals to satellites in space. Hauser and other scientists looked at information. It was collected from 30 whales tagged over 15 years from 1997 to 2012\. One kept a tag for 18 months. Polar bears and Pacific walrus need sea ice as a platform for hunting. Beluga whales can move around sea ice. The scientists tracked belugas into feeding sites. The areas were once covered year-round with sea ice. The scientists were trying to learn where the whales go on their long journeys. Hauser and other scientists did not have much information about what belugas eat. Still, they checked information from the tags with where schools of cod swam.  The whales likely made dives based on where there were large schools of cod, Hauser said. They went as deep as 650 to 1,000 feet. The scientists found a match. The Chukchi were diving where there were the most cod, she said. The tags attached to the belugas could record dives to 3,280 feet. One male beluga went deeper than 3,100 feet in the Canada Basin. The basin is about 10,000 feet deep at its deepest spot. Scientists do not know why belugas would dive so deep there, Hauser said.