Judge says beluga whales will stay put. ATLANTA, Ga. — The Georgia Aquarium lost its legal battle to import 18 beluga whales from Russia, a federal judge ruled this week. The aquarium sued the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) in September 2013 after the federal agency refused to grant a permit to import the whales. U.S. District Judge Amy Totenberg said in a 100-page ruling that the agency properly reviewed the aquarium's permit application. The 1972 Marine Mammal Protection Act prohibits the capture of marine mammals in U.S. waters and by U.S. citizens anywhere. The law generally does not allow the import of marine mammals. There are some exceptions, including one that allows animals to be imported for public display, like at aquariums. Aquarium officials were reviewing the decision, spokeswoman Jessica Fontana said in an email. The government agency, known as NOAA Fisheries, is pleased with the ruling, spokeswoman Connie Barclay said. The aquarium argued that the agency's denial of its permit application was arbitrary and capricious — meaning for no good reason. It has said the whales are needed to strengthen the gene pool of whales in captivity in the United States and for research. The 18 belugas are from the Sea of Okhotsk in northern Russia and were collected by scientists there in 2006, 2010 and 2011. They currently live in the Utrish Marine Mammal Research Station in Russia. Some of the whales would have lived at the Georgia Aquarium, while others would have been loaned to aquariums in Chicago and Connecticut. Originally, SeaWorld facilities in Orlando, San Antonio and San Diego were supposed to take some of the belugas. The company said it had since told the Georgia Aquarium that it no longer wanted to take any of the whales. In denying the permit, NOAA Fisheries said the aquarium failed to show that bringing the whales to the United States would not likely have a negative impact on the remaining whales in the area where the 18 belugas were captured. The agency said it had also determined that importing the whales would likely cause more belugas to be captured from the area in the future. NOAA Fisheries also said some of the whales were too young when they were captured and may still have been nursing, which violates the law. The aquarium disputed those claims. It said it carried out a comprehensive study of the whale population in the area and that the young whales were independent of their mothers by the time of capture. However, NOAA Fisheries "found significant and troubling inconsistencies in Georgia Aquarium's data." It said there was not enough information known about the size and stability of the whale population in the Russian sea, Totenberg wrote. NOAA Fisheries has said its decision applies only to this particular request. Future requests could be granted if they meet the requirements.