Protective measures aren't helping beluga whales come back. ANCHORAGE, Alaska — The beluga whale is a strange and rare creature. Every year, tourists in Alaska hope to catch a glimpse.  Scientists in Alaska's Cook Inlet have been trying to help the endangered beluga whale. Their efforts have not yet paid off. Researchers are studying why.   The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or NOAA, is part of the government. It studies and protects the ocean. NOAA awarded more than $1.3 million to Alaska to study the white whales for three years. Mandy Keogh is a wildlife physiologist with the Alaska Department of Fish and Game. She studies marine wildlife in their environments. Keogh can't figure out why the beluga whales are not growing in number. Keogh knows why there were so few to begin with, but she's not sure why things haven't improved.  A population of 1,300 belugas disappeared through the 1980s and early 1990s. Cook Inlet belugas were declared endangered in 2008\. When a species is endangered, there are not very many left. Unless an endangered species is protected, it could go extinct.  A large decline happened between 1994 and 1998\. Alaska Natives hunting for food killed off nearly half of the remaining 650 whales. Subsistence hunting, the practice of hunting as a way to provide food, ended in 1999\. Nonetheless, the beluga population remains at about 340. Cook Inlet belugas are one of five beluga populations in U.S. waters. Cook Inlet is a body of water in south-central Alaska. It starts in the Gulf of Alaska and reaches Anchorage, Alaska's biggest city. Belugas have a varied diet. They eat salmon, smaller fish, crab, shrimp, squid and clams. The whales are nicknamed "sea canaries" for being so noisy. They make a wide range of whistles, grunts and clicks. They also use echolocation to navigate under ice and find prey in murky water. Echolocation works through the use of sound waves. If an animal sends out a sound and that sound bounces back, it's because the sound wave hit something. Scientists are studying the belugas in new ways. They want to find out what is preventing the whales from reproducing. The scientists will look specifically at pods of beluga whales in Cook Inlet. A pod is a group of whales. Feeding patterns, the social structure of whale pods and the effects of noise will all be studied. One new study will focus on beluga prey and their habitat. Scientists will look at teeth collected over the years from hunted or stranded belugas. Studying the teeth can show how feeding patterns may have changed during a whale's life. Mat Wooller is a professor at the University of Alaska in Fairbanks. He sees a natural comparison for these teeth. "Like tree rings," he says "teeth have annual growth layers."   Last week, NOAA researchers set up sound equipment to record belugas feeding. The whales make a specific buzz sound after successfully finding food. "Right now we don't know what they're feeding on in winter," Keogh said. Researchers will also listen for sounds of migrant killer whales and noises from machinery. Killer whales may be predators. The machinery could scare belugas away from feeding areas. Additionally, scientists will study the social makeup of pods. Belugas in Alaska's Bristol Bay have also been studied and are growing. Scientists will compare the two groups. According to Keogh, researchers do not know exactly how belugas mate. "We don't know if belugas need one male for every female," she said. They could even be like wolves, where not every member reproduces. The state of Alaska has a strong interest in the beluga population. Belugas attract tourists as they swim in waters along Alaska highways.  There are other interests that threaten the beluga. Cook Inlet has important resources. Oil and gas from the area help power Anchorage, Alaska's largest city. The state has rules about drilling for oil. These rules are meant to protect the environment. However, the state might decide that the rules are not helping the beluga population. If that happens they may want to lift restrictions. This might allow companies to make more money.  It's difficult to tell what will happen. "If you don't know the factors that are preventing [the belugas] from recovering, it's really hard to appropriately manage them," Keogh said.