Judge says beluga whales will stay put. ATLANTA, Ga. — The Georgia Aquarium cannot bring in 18 beluga whales from Russia. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) is a government department. It is in charge of the oceans. It also decides whether marine mammals can be brought to the United States. NOAA refused to let the Georgia Aquarium import the whales into the United States. In 2013, the aquarium asked a judge to give it permission to bring in the whales. A judge decided this week that the whales must stay where they are. U.S. District Judge Amy Totenberg said that NOAA had followed the law. The 1972 Marine Mammal Protection Act forbids the capture of marine mammals in U.S. waters. In fact, U.S. citizens cannot capture them anywhere. The law generally does not let marine mammals be brought into the country at all. There are some special cases, though. Marine animals may be imported to be put on display, like at an aquarium. Aquarium officials were looking over the judge's decision, said Jessica Fontana. She is with the aquarium. NOAA is happy with the judge's decision, said Connie Barclay, who works for NOAA. The aquarium argued that NOAA should have let it import the whales. It said NOAA did not have a good reason to turn down the aquarium. It said that too many whales in aquariums are related to each other, which is bad for whales. The new beluga whales would breed with U.S. whales. Their babies would be stronger and healthier. The aquarium also said the whales are needed for study and research. The 18 belugas are from the Sea of Okhotsk in northern Russia. They were collected by scientists there in 2006, 2010 and 2011. Now they live in the Utrish Marine Mammal Research Station in Russia. Some of the whales would have gone to the Georgia Aquarium. Others would have been loaned to aquariums in Chicago, Illinois, and Connecticut. Sea World parks in Florida, Texas and California were going to take some of the whales. Later, the company decided it no longer wanted them. The law says that whales cannot be imported if it would harm other whales in the area. The aquarium had to show that the remaining whales in the sea in Russia would be OK. NOAA said the aquarium did not prove that. Also, NOAA said that if the whales were imported, more belugas would likely be captured from the same area in the future. People might capture them to sell. NOAA also said some of the whales were too young when they were captured. They may still have been nursing, which is against the law. The aquarium answered that none of these claims are true. It said it studied the whale population in the area. The young whales were not with their mothers when they were captured, the aquarium said. There were problems with the aquarium's information about the whales, NOAA said. It called the problems "troubling." Also, not enough is known about the size and safety of the whale population in the sea in Russia, Totenberg wrote in her 100-page decision. NOAA has said these particular whales cannot be brought into the country. Aquariums can still ask to bring in other whales, if they follow the rules.