Protective measures aren't helping beluga whales come back. ANCHORAGE, Alaska — Alaska's Cook Inlet is an important habitat for the highly endangered beluga whale. The beluga whale population has been dangerously low since the late 1990s.  Researchers are investigating why the beluga whale has not recovered despite attempts to protect the habitat and promote population growth. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) has awarded more than $1.3 million to the state of Alaska for three years of research on beluga whales. Mandy Keogh, a wildlife physiologist with the Alaska Department of Fish and Game, can't figure out why the beluga whales are not repopulating. "While we know what we believe caused the initial decline," she said, "we're not sure what's causing the population to remain suppressed."  A population of 1,300 belugas dwindled steadily through the 1980s and early 1990s. The decline accelerated when Alaska Natives hunted nearly half the remaining 650 whales between 1994 and 1998\. Subsistence hunting, the practice of hunting as a way to provide food, ended in 1999\. Nonetheless, the beluga population remains at only about 340 animals. Cook Inlet belugas are one of five beluga populations in U.S. waters. Cook Inlet, named for British explorer Captain James Cook, stretches 180 miles from Anchorage to the Gulf of Alaska. Belugas feed on salmon, smaller fish, crab, shrimp, squid and clams. Commonly known as "sea canaries," the whales make a wide range of whistles, grunts and clicks. They also use echolocation to navigate under ice and find prey in murky water. Other animals, like bats, use echolocation by sending out sound waves that bounce back if they meet an obstacle, like another animal. Cook Inlet belugas were declared endangered in 2008. Scientists will review several factors that might be preventing population growth within groups of whales, which are called pods. Feeding patterns, social structure of whale pods, and the effects of noise are all factors under consideration. One new study will focus on beluga prey and their habitat. Researchers will analyze teeth collected over the years from hunted or stranded belugas. Key to this study are stable isotopes, which are atoms that don't change their essential structure as time passes. Such isotopes found in teeth provide a chemical understanding of a whale's diet. Measuring these chemical remains can show how feeding patterns may have changed throughout a whale's life. "Like tree rings, teeth have annual growth layers," said Mat Wooller, chemical oceanography professor at the University of Alaska Fairbanks, in a statement. "Measuring isotopes in these growth layers can reveal how whales' feeding habits have changed over the life of an animal." Keogh says that chemical findings in teeth can reveal whether belugas ate fish higher in the water column or prey along the ocean floor. Environmental scientists study conditions of the sea according to depth in the water column. Certain characteristics like temperature, pH and chemicals are different throughout the column. Streams within Cook Inlet have a unique presence of the element strontium. Fish that hatch in this area, such as salmon and eulachon, contain a high concentration of this element. Last week, NOAA researchers deployed acoustic equipment to record belugas feeding. The whales emit a specific buzz sound after successfully finding food. "Right now we don't know what they're feeding on in winter," Keogh said. Researchers also will listen for sounds of migrant killer whales who are possible predators to the beluga. Also on the radar are industrial noises that could displace belugas from feeding areas. In addition, researchers will study pod social structures and compare their findings to a growing population of belugas in Alaska's Bristol Bay. Those belugas have been studied for the past decade by researchers from Chicago's Shedd Aquarium and Atlanta's Georgia Aquarium in partnership with state, federal and university scientists. The Cook Inlet pods may be missing specific segments needed for a growing population, Keogh said. "For example, we don't know if belugas need one male for every female, or whether they're more similar to something like a wolf pack, where not all individuals in the group are reproducing," she said. While NOAA Fisheries manages the animals, the state of Alaska has a strong interest in their recovery. Belugas are a tourist draw as they swim in waters along Alaska highways. Visitors to Alaska spend money on ocean tours with the hopes of catching a glimpse of the rare creature. There are competing interests, however. Cook Inlet petroleum helps keep the lights on in Anchorage, Alaska's largest city. If the state finds out that rules and regulations governing the petroleum industry are not helping the beluga population, it will want to lift development restrictions. It's difficult to tell what effect this new research will have. Keogh, however, seems hopeful that scientists will be able to help the belugas recover. "If you don't know the factors that are preventing them from recovering, it's really hard to appropriately manage them, or to know what factors to try to alleviate," Keogh said.