Protective measures aren't helping beluga whales come back. ANCHORAGE, Alaska — Alaska's Cook Inlet is an important habitat for the highly endangered beluga whale. The beluga population has been low since the late 90s. Researchers are studying why the beluga whale has not increased despite attempts to help the population grow. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) is a government organization that studies and protects the oceans and atmosphere. NOAA awarded more than $1.3 million to the state of Alaska for three years of research involving the white whales. Mandy Keogh is a wildlife physiologist with the Alaska Department of Fish and Game. Physiologists study the mechanisms and functions of a body. Keogh can't figure out why the beluga whales are not repopulating. "While we know what we believe caused the initial decline," she said, "we're not sure what's causing the population to remain suppressed."  A population of 1,300 belugas dwindled steadily through the 1980s and early 1990s. The decline accelerated when Alaska Natives hunted nearly half of the remaining 650 whales between 1994 and 1998\. Subsistence hunting, the practice of hunting as a way to provide food, ended in 1999\. Nonetheless, the beluga population remains at only about 340. Cook Inlet belugas are one of five beluga populations in U.S. waters. Cook Inlet, named for British explorer Captain James Cook, stretches 180 miles from Anchorage to the Gulf of Alaska. Belugas eat salmon, smaller fish, crab, shrimp, squid and clams. Commonly known as "sea canaries," the whales make a wide range of whistles, grunts and clicks. They also use echolocation to navigate under ice and find prey in murky water. Other animals, like bats, use echolocation. These animals can send out sound waves that bounce back if they meet an obstacle, like another animal. The Cook Inlet belugas were declared endangered in 2008. The new funding will allow scientists to review several factors that might be preventing the whales from reproducing. Scientists will look at feeding patterns and the effects of noise. They'll also study how groups of whales, called pods, are structured.  One new study will focus on beluga prey and their habitat. Researchers will analyze teeth collected over the years from hunted or stranded belugas. Key to this study are stable isotopes, which are atoms that don't change their essential structure as time passes. Such isotopes found in teeth provide a chemical understanding of a whale's diet. Measuring these chemical remains can show how feeding patterns may have changed throughout a whale's life. Mat Wooller is a chemical oceanography professor at the University of Alaska in Fairbanks. He sees a natural comparison for these teeth. "Like tree rings," he says "teeth have annual growth layers."   According to Keogh, chemical findings in teeth can reveal whether belugas ate fish higher in the water column or prey along the ocean floor. Environmental scientists look at conditions of the sea according to levels in the water column. Certain traits of the ocean are different throughout the column. Last week, NOAA researchers deployed acoustic equipment to record the sound of belugas feeding. The whales emit a specific buzz sound after successfully finding food. "Right now we don't know what they're feeding on in winter," Keogh said. Researchers will also listen for sounds of migrant killer whales, possible predators to the beluga. They will also keep an ear out for industrial noises, which could scare belugas away from feeding areas. Additionally, researchers will study the social structures of pods. They will compare their findings to a growing population of belugas in Alaska's Bristol Bay. Those belugas have been studied for the past decade by researchers from Chicago's Shedd Aquarium and Atlanta's Georgia Aquarium. The Cook Inlet pods may be missing whales needed for a growing population, Keogh said. For example, the ages of the whales might be different.  According to Keogh, researchers don't know exactly how belugas mate. "We don't know if belugas need one male for every female, or whether they're more similar to something like a wolf pack, where not all individuals in the group are reproducing," she said. While NOAA Fisheries manages the animals, the state of Alaska has a strong interest in their health. Belugas attract tourists as they swim in waters along Alaska highways. Visitors spend money on ocean tours with the hopes of catching a glimpse of the rare creature. There are other interests that could pose a threat to the beluga. Cook Inlet petroleum helps power Anchorage, Alaska's largest city. The state might decide that rules and regulations governing the petroleum industry are not helping the beluga population. If that happens they may want to lift restrictions on the industry. It's difficult to tell what effect this will have. "If you don't know the factors that are preventing [the belugas] from recovering, it's really hard to appropriately manage them, or to know what factors to try to alleviate," Keogh said.