People are trying to come up with ways to move the large bison herd out of the national park to where they can be hunted. WASHINGTON — A herd of bison has been roaming an area of the Grand Canyon in northern Arizona. Officials are trying to figure out how to control the nearly 350 large animals there. They are damaging plants and water. The herd had been smaller because they were hunted. Then, several years ago, the animals wandered into Grand Canyon National Park. They cannot be hunted there. Diane Chalfant, a park official, says the animals know they're safe in the park. It will take close to two years of study and public input to develop a final plan. Park officials want to get the bison out of the national park and on to state lands. The animals can be hunted there. Bison are not normally from the Grand Canyon. They were brought to the area more than 100 years ago as part of an attempt to mate bison with cattle. The state bought the herd in 1925. In 1950 it was placed in the House Rock Wildlife Area under the control of the state. Hunting kept the size of the herd at about 100 animals. But the animals moved in the past 20 or 30 years to the hunt-free Grand Canyon, Chalfant said. There are now so many bison in the area that they're damaging the park, she said. Before, talks about moving them had gone nowhere. But people have started talking again because of the amount of damage now being done by the bison. The animals are carving large beds near bodies of water and overgrazing on plants. Both crowd out native animals and allow soil to wash away. On April 4, the National Park Service posted a notice in a government newspaper. It said other state and national agencies will help make new plans. The plans will be shared at public meetings before any decisions are made. Officials want to get a sense of what other people think, Chalfant said. But she said the park service would like to move the bison to hunting areas where their numbers can be managed. Sandy Bahr, who leads a nearby environmental group, wants the bison to be hunted by animals like wolves. Bahr doesn't want the bison to go where people will hunt them. Their natural predators help to keep their population at a better level, Bahr said. “Hunting does not mimic that.” Bahr said groups of animals are better when the strongest stay alive. Hunters tend to shoot those strong animals, not the smaller ones that other animals take. Hunting could cause significant damage to the herd, she said. Moving the bison outside the park will not solve the problem, Bahr said. The animals will just walk back in to the park where they are safe. “These animals don’t read maps,” she said. The animals won't stay out of the park just because people want them to stay away. "That just doesn’t work.” She said the park workers should move the bison so far from the park that they can't wander back.