Not everyone wants the bison to stay in the national park where they are safe from hunters. WASHINGTON — A group of bison is loose in the Grand Canyon. Workers are figuring out what to do with the large animals. They are harming plants and water in the Arizona park. The group, or herd, used to be hunted. The animals wandered into Grand Canyon National Park several years ago. They cannot be hunted there and now there are nearly 350. Diane Chalfant, a park worker, says the animals know they're safe there. It will take almost two years of work to come up with a final plan. Park officials want to get the bison out of the national park. If they move to state lands, the animals can be hunted. Bison are not normally from the Grand Canyon. They were brought to the area more than 100 years ago. People wanted to try to mate bison with cows to make a new type of animal. The state bought the herd in 1925. Twenty-five years later it was put in the House Rock Wildlife Area under the control of the state. Hunting kept the size of the herd at about 100 animals. Twenty or 30 years ago the animals moved to the Grand Canyon, Chalfant said. There are now too many bison in the park and the herd is damaging the area, she said. People couldn't figure out what to do about the herd in the past. Park workers started planning again because of the damage in the park. Bison dig holes too close to water and eat too many of the plants. They crowd out other animals and make soil wash away. The National Park Service put a notice in a newspaper in April. It said other government offices will help make new plans. Any plans will be shared with the public before decisions are made. Workers want to know what other people think, Chalfant said. But she said the park service wants to move the bison to hunting areas. Hunting will keep the size of the herd smaller. Sandy Bahr, head of a nature group, wants other animals to hunt the bison, not people. Predators like wolves keep the herd at a better size, Bahr said. Bahr said it's good when the strongest animals stay alive. Hunters tend to shoot the strong ones. They do not shoot the smaller ones that other animals eat. Hunters take the big bison and predators take the small ones. In this way, hunting can hurt the herd, she said. Moving the bison away will not solve the problem, Bahr said. The animals will just walk back in, where they are safe. “These animals don’t read maps,” she said. The animals won't stay out of the park just because people want them to. "That just doesn’t work." She said the bison need to go so far away that they can't wander back.