Bison are safe in the national park where they cannot be hunted. But they must be moved because they are eating the vegetation and hurting the water supply. WASHINGTON — A herd of bison has been roaming an area of the Grand Canyon, damaging plants and water sources. Now, officials are trying to figure out how to control the nearly 350 animals there. Hunting kept the herd numbers down before. However, since the animals wandered into Grand Canyon National Park several years ago, it has been against the law to hunt them. The bison stay in the park because they know they're safe there, said Diane Chalfant. She is a Grand Canyon official. It will take close to two years of study and input from the public to develop a final plan. Park officials want to get the bison out of the national park and onto state lands. On state lands the animals can be hunted. The bison are not native to the Grand Canyon. They were brought to northern Arizona more than 100 years ago, as part of an attempt to mate bison with cattle. The herd was sold to the state in 1925. In 1950 the animals were placed in the House Rock Wildlife Area under the control of the state wildlife department. Their numbers were kept at about 100 animals through hunting. But they moved in the past 20 or 30 years to the hunt-free Grand Canyon, Chalfant said. There are now so many bison in the area that they're beginning to see more effects on the park, she said. Previous discussions about moving the herd got nowhere but were restarted after seeing the amount of damage now being done by the bison. The animals are carving large beds near water sources and overgrazing on plants. Both crowd out native animals and cause erosion. On April 4 the National Park Service published a notice in a federal newspaper. It said other state and federal agencies will help create new plans. Any new plans will be shared at public hearings before any decisions are made. Officials want to get a sense of what the public thinks, Chalfant said. But she said the park service is leaning toward moving the bison to hunting areas, where their numbers can be managed. Sandy Bahr, head of a local chapter of an environmental group, wants to move the bison somewhere they can be hunted by other animals, like wolves, not people. “Their predators ... help to keep their population at a more sustainable level,” Bahr said. “Hunting does not mimic that.” Bahr said a species survives when the strongest stay alive. Hunters tend to shoot those strong animals instead of the weaker, smaller animals that natural predators take. Hunting could cause significant damage to the herd, she said. Moving the bison outside the park will not solve the problem, Bahr said. The animals will just walk back in to the park where they are safe. “These animals don’t read maps,” she said. “You can’t just say, ‘OK, here’s the park boundary and stay outside of the boundary.’ That just doesn’t work.” She said the park service should consider moving the bison so far from park boundaries that they can't migrate back.