About 75 percent of female Mormon butterflies have color patterns that make them look poisonous to predators. But the rest of the females and all the males don't have this mimicry. LOS ANGELES — Pity the poor male common Mormon swallowtail butterfly. His possible female mates bear four different color patterns. But only one of them looks familiar. The rest look suspiciously like other species, and poisonous species at that. That problem is good news for 75 percent of the swallowtail butterfly ladies. After all, they are left alone by predators that have learned not to dine on the real toxic butterfly. But while masquerading as another species works just fine for them, the male and the masculine-colored female are still at risk. Biologists have studied cases of species mimicking other species since the dawn of Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution. Evolution is the theory that species evolve — or change — to become better at living in their environment. Animals that mimic other animals provide a field test for natural selection. In a nutshell, natural selection is the process by which organisms that are better suited to their environment survive, while others do not. Organism is just a broad term that covers all living things, including animals, plants, and single-celled life forms. Species often keep traits that help them survive because the animals with helpful genes survive while animals with unhelpful genes sometimes die off. Genes are inherited from parents. Genes can determine what color they are, how big they are and many other characteristics. The slow changes to an entire species that come out of this process of natural selection is known as evolution. But while mimicry has long been studied, it is still a mystery just how it becomes restricted to females of a species. Scientists suspected the handiwork of a “super gene.” They figured that this is a cluster of similar genes, said Marcus R. Kronforst, an evolutionary biologist. He says it's likely that each individual gene was doing some subset of that color pattern, but they were so close together that they would all be inherited as a single unit. “That’s where the name ‘super gene’ came from. They just couldn’t imagine that a single gene could do all this.” Researchers have found evidence of a unified gene cluster in one butterfly species, so Kronforst sought out the super gene of the Mormon swallowtail. To find it, he mated butterflies of different wing patterns and studied the genes of some 500 offspring. “We essentially expected to see the same thing, that there would be a cluster of very tightly linked genes,” Kronforst said. “But that’s not what we found. In this butterfly, in this one species at least, it is just one gene." The name of that one gene is called "doublesex." Doublesex happens to be the signaling gene that tells the cells what females should look like and what males should look like. It is not the one that actually determines gender for the organism, however. "It’s not on the sex chromosomes," said Kronforst, who published his research team’s findings online Wednesday in the journal Nature. “It reads a message from the sex chromosomes and then it forms two different types of proteins. There’s a male type of protein and a female type of protein, and that’s what tells the other cells in the body: You are male and you are female.” When he looked more closely at the females that were mimicking other species, Kronforst found that the doublesex gene was holding on to about 1,000 base pair mutations. “It basically locks all of the mutations into one unit so they can’t recombine,” Kronforst said. Exactly what mutations may be responsible for which colors remains a mystery. Kronforst plans further research aimed at answering this intriguing question. Other broad questions remain, too. “If mimicry is helping these females survive, why on Earth aren’t the males getting the same advantage?” Kronforst said. “We simply do not understand the answer to that question.” And how does the non-mimicking female pattern survive? “If she really was that bad off, that copy of the gene would simply disappear from the population,” Kronforst said. “The individuals that were mimetic would do so much better that she would just disappear. But that pattern hangs on. There’s also something that’s keeping the males in the non-mimetic pattern that we still don’t understand.” Kronforst believes that counterbalancing selection may be at play: Some trait that helps the butterflies survive is paired with a trait that seems disadvantageous, then both are conserved. In humans, that counterbalancing arrangement pairs sickle cell with malaria resistance. “Basically what the butterflies have done is they have grabbed this mechanism that they already use to tell males from females," Kronforst said. "They’re using it again to tell females that you’ll like A, B, C or D.” In other words, doublesex does two different things: form male and female proteins, and also chooses one of four color patterns. Kronforst wants to find out how the gene operates in other species that have similar male-female mimicry differences. What other characteristics might it drive? Does it change flight patterns as well? “It’s possible that this gene is doing lots of other stuff,” Kronforst said.