Why can 75 percent of female Mormon butterflies look poisonous to predators? And why can't the rest of the females, and all the males, do the same thing? Scientists try to solve this mystery. LOS ANGELES — Feel bad for the common Mormon swallowtail butterfly male. His possible female mates can come in four different color patterns. But only one of those patterns looks familiar. The rest look a lot like other butterflies, and poisonous ones at that. The problem is unknown to 75 percent of the swallowtail butterfly ladies. Because they look like a poisonous butterfly, they are left alone by predators. But while masquerading as another species works just fine for them, the male and the masculine-colored female are still at risk. Biologists have studied for a long time how animals can look like other animals. This is because it teaches them a lot about the process of natural selection. Natural selection is often called "survival of the fittest." It means that animals with traits that help them will survive. A trait might be their color. It might be what they eat or how they hunt. An animal's traits can help it live longer. If it lives long enough, the animal's children can also have traits that help them survive. Eventually, the whole species might have these survival traits. Animals without these traits might get eaten or die out. Scientists have studied how animals and plants change to imitate other plants or animals. Still, mysteries remain. Why can only female swallowtail butterflies mimic other butterflies? Why can't the male butterflies? The scientists think it might be caused by a “super gene.” Genes are like instructions for the body. They tell the body what an animal should look or be like. They can tell what color it will be, how strong it is, how big it is and more. Scientists "just couldn’t imagine that a single gene could do all this,” said scientist Marcus R. Kronforst. They believed it has to a be group of genes working together — a super gene. Each individual gene, they figured, was handling a small part of the color pattern. Researchers have found evidence of such a super gene in one butterfly species. So Kronforst looked for the super gene of the Mormon swallowtail. To find it, he mated butterflies with different wing patterns. Then, he studied the genes of some 500 of their offspring. He said they expected to find a bunch of genes that pooled together to make up a "super gene." Instead, they found just one gene. The gene they found is responsible for making the females able to change patterns, but it has nothing to do with whether the butterfly will be a female or male. Other broad questions remain. “If mimicry is helping these females survive, why on Earth aren’t the males getting the same advantage?” Kronforst said. “We simply do not understand the answer to that question.” And how does the non-mimicking female pattern stay alive? “If she really was that bad off, that copy of the gene would simply disappear from the population,” Kronforst said. The butterflies that imitated other butterflies would do so much better that the one that could not imitates others would just disappear. "But that pattern hangs on," Kronforst said. He believes that what is called "counterbalancing selection" may be at play. Sometimes if a harmful characteristic is paired with a helpful one, both are kept. Kronforst wants to find out how the gene acts in other animals that have the same male-female differences as the Mormon swallowtail. What other changes might it drive? Does it change flight patterns as well? “It’s possible that this gene is doing lots of other stuff,” Kronforst said.