Because of their color patterns, many female Mormon butterflies look like poisonous butterflies to predators, even though they aren't. Why can't the other females and males do this? LOS ANGELES — The poor Mormon swallowtail butterfly! His possible female mates come in four different color patterns. But he can only recognize one of the patterns. The others look a lot like other butterflies. What's more, they also look like poisonous ones. About three-fourths of the swallowtail butterfly ladies are safe from predators. Because they look like a poisonous butterfly, they are left alone by predators. Looking like another species works just fine for them. While they avoid getting eaten, the male and the masculine-colored female are still at risk. For a long time, biologists have studied how animals look like other animals. It teaches them a lot about natural selection. Natural selection is sometimes called "survival of the fittest." It means that animals with traits that help them will survive. A trait might be their color. It might be what they eat or how they hunt. An animal's traits can help it live longer. If it lives long enough, the animal's children can also have traits that help them survive. Eventually, the whole species might have these survival traits. Animals without these traits might get eaten or die out. Scientists have studied how animals and plants change to act or look like other plants or animals. Still, mysteries remain. Why can only female swallowtail butterflies look like other butterflies? Why can't the male butterflies do it? The scientists think it might be caused by a “super gene.” The genes are inherited from parents. They are like directions for the body. They tell the body what traits the animal will have. Scientists "just couldn’t imagine that a single gene could do all this," said scientist Marcus R. Kronforst. They believed it has to a be group of genes working together. They called it a "super gene." Each gene would handle a small part of the color pattern, they thought. Researchers have found proof of a super gene in one type of butterfly. So Kronforst looked for the super gene of the Mormon swallowtail. To find it, he mated butterflies with different wing patterns. Then, when the butterflies had children, he studied them. He looked at the genes of about 500 children. He said they expected to find a bunch of genes that pooled together to make up a "super gene." Instead, they found just one gene. The gene they found helps the females change their color patterns. The scientists still have big questions. If the females can look like other butterflies, why can't the males? Kronforst asked. “We simply do not understand the answer to that question.” And how do females who do not look like poisonous butterflies survive? “If she really was that bad off, that copy of the gene would simply disappear from the population,” Kronforst said. The butterflies that looked like other butterflies would do so much better. One day, the butterfly that couldn't look like other butterflies would just disappear. "But that pattern hangs on," Kronforst said. Kronforst wants to find out how the gene acts in other animals that have the same male-female differences as the Mormon swallowtail. What other changes might it drive? Does it change flight patterns as well? “It’s possible that this gene is doing lots of other stuff,” Kronforst said.