It may not be possible anyway. Millions of people now live along the California coast where the grizzlies once hunted food. THREE RIVERS, Calif. — In this part of California, people like to see black bears. Cindy Skeen said she often sees black bears around her house. She isn't afraid of the bears because she thinks they are playful. They don't attack humans. That could change soon. Some people want to bring back grizzly bears. Grizzly bears are larger, stronger and more dangerous than black bears. They used to live in the state, but they have not been seen here for 90 years. Some people asked the government to make space for grizzly bears in five states. California would be one of them. People are scared of the idea. It could take years before the state agency in charge of wildlife decides to bring back the bears. Scientists need time to study the problem. People will also have a chance to talk about it. Grizzly bears are famous in California. One is included on the state flag. Love for the big bears seems to stop there. The grizzlies were hunted down in California. Now they have to live in a national park in Wyoming. Bringing the bears back to California may not be possible. Grizzlies used to live along the coast. They stayed in the river valleys and near the ocean. A lot of people live in those places now. The group that wants to bring the grizzly back wants to put 300 to 400 bears in the mountains. The grizzly deserves its fearsome reputation. Many of the bear's past problems came from scaring people. Sometimes grizzlies run away from people, but they will also fight. People need to get used to living near the bears. Otherwise, they won't be able to stay in California. This could cause trouble for the grizzlies. Dave Graber used to be a scientist. He has traveled in grizzly areas around the country. He says he can’t imagine Californians getting used to the big bears. If there was a place for them, he would want them in California, Graber said. But there are just too many people living here now.