A group has proposed bringing the grizzly back to California. Although many people here love black bears, the bigger and more dangerous grizzlies are an entirely different matter, experts say. THREE RIVERS, Calif. — The first question many visitors to this woodsy California town ask of rangers is: “Where can I see a bear?” People love black bears here, on the doorstep to two national parks. Local shop owner Cindy Skeen said she often sees black bears around her house, finding them more playful than dangerous. That could change soon. Grizzlies — a larger, stronger and more dangerous cousin of black bears — might be brought back to California where they have not been seen for 90 years. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is considering a request to set aside 110,000 square miles for grizzly bears in California, Arizona, New Mexico, Utah and Colorado. Skeen was shocked to hear of the idea. “Oh, I don’t know ... people let their kids go hiking by themselves out here,” she said. People from out of town are already scared of black bears, she said. “And grizzlies?” If the agency decides to proceed with bringing back grizzlies, it will study the issue and hold public hearings. That process could take years. Grizzly bears are iconic in California, where they are immortalized on the state flag. But the love for the bear appears to stop there. The big bears were hunted so efficiently that the last grizzly seen in the wild was here in the Sierra in 1924. Nationally, grizzlies were listed as a threatened species in 1975. Since then, no one has known where to put them. Grizzlies have been forced to live in and around the far-off Yellowstone National Park in Wyoming. Yellowstone is not the best home for grizzlies. It does not provide enough open country that the bears love. Its 700 grizzlies share 3,400 square miles, which is enough room to support the bears well enough. The Department of Fish and Wildlife is expected to remove federal protections for grizzlies in the region soon. Finding similar space may not be possible in California. Historically, grizzlies lived most densely along the California coast. They stayed in the river valleys and near the ocean in the central part of the state. Those marshes and valleys offered bears food at every turn: antelope and elk, acorns in the fall, and plenty of big fish. But those areas are now dense with people. Noah Greenwald works for the Center for Biological Diversity, a group that asked government officials to bring the grizzly back. He wants to move the bears to inland mountains in eastern California. His group wants to release 300 to 400 bears in the area on a stretch of land with parks and wilderness areas. Wildlife scientists say that many bears would require about 6,000 to 8,000 square miles of space. Encouraging the largest predator in America to live anywhere in a crowded state seems unlikely to some experts and unwise to others. “I can understand people wanting to see them here,” said Eric Loft, chief of wildlife for the California Department of Fish and Wildlife. “But is it really suitable, given that California has nearly 40 million people?” Greenwald agreed with the need to proceed cautiously. “At this point what we are proposing is studying the idea,” Greenwald said. “This is a long-term project.” Even if grizzlies were reintroduced in the protected borders of national parks, they would certainly wander out. This could potentially place them in conflict with people. Many of the bear's problems in the U.S. have been caused by a lack of human tolerance for the animals. The grizzly deserves its fearsome reputation, especially next to the black bear. But grizzly hostility toward humans can be explained by habits developed over generations, scientists say. Black bears evolved in forested areas, and climb trees if threatened. Grizzlies evolved in open country with few trees to climb, so they respond to threats by fighting to defend themselves or by running away. The willingness of humans to live with wild and sometimes dangerous animals is important in determining how well the bear will live on land near humans. This could spell trouble for grizzlies. Many Californians are used to living near black bears. Wildlife authorities can move them away if the animals get too comfortable in areas full of people. Grizzlies might not get the same chance. Dave Graber, a retired scientist for the National Park Service, has traveled in grizzly areas around the country. He can’t imagine Californians getting used to the bears. “If there was place to put them, I would be arguing very strongly to put them there,” Graber said. "I’m sorry there are so many people here.”