People from out of town are already scared of black bears, said one resident. She herself finds them more playful than dangerous. But grizzlies? She's not so sure about that at all. THREE RIVERS, Calif. — People love black bears in this woodsy California town. When tourists stop on their way to the nearby national parks, their first question is: “Where can I see a bear?" Town shop owner Cindy Skeen said she often sees black bears around her house. She thinks they are more playful than dangerous. That could change soon. Grizzly bears — a larger, stronger and more dangerous cousin of black bears — might be brought to California. Although they used to live in the state, they have not been seen there for 90 years. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is considering an environmental group’s call to set aside space for grizzly bears in California, Arizona, New Mexico, Utah and Colorado. Skeen was shocked to hear of the idea. “Oh, I don’t know ... people let their kids go hiking by themselves out here,” she said. People from out of town are already scared of black bears, Skeen said. “And grizzlies?” It could take years before the agency decides to bring back the bears. Scientists need time to study it. The public will also have a chance to share their thoughts. Grizzly bears are famous in California. One is included on the state flag. Love for the grizzlies seems to stop there though. The big bears were hunted so much that no grizzly has been seen in the wild in the state since 1924. Grizzlies have had to live in Yellowstone National Park and the surrounding area in Wyoming. Yellowstone does not provide enough of the open country that the bears love. Still, the 700 bears there are living well enough. The government is expected to remove protections for grizzlies in the region. Nationally, grizzlies were listed as a threatened species in 1975. The bears were in danger of being wiped out because of human actions. Since then, no one has been certain where to put them. Finding a space for them in California may not be possible. Historically, grizzlies lived along the California coast. They stayed in the river valleys and near the ocean in the northern half of the state. The big bears had plenty of food in those marshy areas: antelope and elk, acorns and fish. But those areas are now dense with people. Noah Greenwald works for a wildlife group that asked government officials to bring the grizzly back. His group wants to release 300 to 400 bears in the mountains of eastern California. “I can understand people wanting to see them here,” said Eric Loft, a wildlife official for the California government. He says that it might be too difficult, "given that California has nearly 40 million people.” Greenwald agreed with the need to move slowly. “At this point what we are proposing is studying the idea,” Greenwald said. “This is a long-term project.” Experts know grizzlies would wander out of the protected borders of national parks. This would potentially place them in conflict with people. Many of the grizzly bear's past problems came from such run-ins. The grizzly deserves its fearsome reputation, especially in contrast to the black bear. Scientists say the things that make grizzly bears hostile toward humans can be explained by evolution. Evolution is the growth of traits over millions of years. The traits can include things like your hair color, or how you walk, eat or protect yourself. Black bears evolved in forested areas. They climb trees if threatened. Grizzlies evolved in open country, with few trees to climb, where they had to fight or run away. Sometimes grizzlies run away, but if confronted at close range, they will fight to defend themselves. The willingness of humans to live with wild and sometimes dangerous animals is important to the animals' chance of survival. This could spell trouble for the grizzlies. Dave Graber, a retired scientist for the National Park Service, has traveled in grizzly areas around the country. He can’t imagine Californians getting used to the bears. “If there was place to put them, I would be arguing very strongly to put them there,” Graber said. "I’m sorry there are so many people here.”