Cambodia brings back foreign tigers. PHNOM PENH, Cambodia — Cambodia has unveiled a plan to reintroduce tigers from abroad into the dry forests of the country, where the big cat has become virtually extinct due to poaching, conservation officials said Wednesday. Between 20 and 50 tigers were believed to exist in Cambodia's forests. Even though poaching is against the law, it continues to occur. Years of poaching the tigers as well as their prey have led to a dramatic decline in their population. The last tiger spotted in Cambodia was seen in 2007 by camera trap in the forests of eastern Mondulkiri province, the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) said in a statement. The camera traps contain a hidden camera that is remotely triggered by the movement of animals.  "Today, there are no longer any breeding populations of tigers left in Cambodia, and they are, therefore, considered functionally extinct," the statement said. The statement was released at a joint news conference by representatives of the government, the WWF and the Wildlife Alliance, another conservation group. Keo Omaliss, a government official in charge of wildlife, said Cambodia is considering negotiating with the governments of India, Malaysia and Thailand. They want to bring at least seven tigers to live in the protected forests of Mondulkiri so they can breed and repopulate the forests. "This would be the world's first transnational tiger reintroduction, and will be based on best practices developed from successful tiger reintroductions within India," the WWF statement said. The plan was approved by Cambodia's government March 23. The plan is to bring in the tigers after two years. First, Cambodia needs to resolve related problems. These include poaching and rebuilding the population of tiger prey, which will be needed to sustain a tiger population, said Chhit Sam Ath, the director of the WWF in Cambodia. He said the arrival of the tigers could be pushed back to 2018 if the preservation efforts are not completed by 2017. "Tigers are an iconic species and part of our natural heritage," he said. "To bring tigers back to Cambodia would be the biggest conservation feat of its kind and would support the conservation efforts of the whole landscape." The entire plan will cost $20 million to $50 million, which will come from donor countries. The Khmer Rouge group ran the Cambodian government in the 1970s. Its brutal rule left Cambodia devastated, which led poor rural dwellers to scour the forests for wildlife. Many of the tigers they hunted were sold to traders connected to China, where many wild animals, including tigers, are believed to possess beneficial properties. Tigers have been classified as nearly extinct species worldwide. There are only about 3,200 tigers left in 13 countries globally, according to the WWF.