Cambodia brings back foreign tigers. PHNOM PENH, Cambodia — Cambodia has a plan to bring tigers from different countries into its forests. Cambodia is a country located between Thailand and Vietnam. Many tigers have been killed in these countries. Hunting tigers is against the law. Still, it continues to happen.  Between 20 and 50 tigers once lived in Cambodia's forests. Both the tigers and the animals that tigers eat were hunted. Soon, there were fewer living tigers. The World Wildlife Fund is a group that helps animals. It is called the WWF for short. WWF workers look for tigers with a camera trap. This is a hidden camera that sees when animals come near. The last time a tiger was spotted in Cambodia was 2007\.   Today, there are no longer tigers left in Cambodia, the WWF said. All of them have died. The only ones left are in zoos. Keo Omaliss is in charge of wildlife for Cambodia. He said Cambodia is talking with India, Malaysia and Thailand. These are nearby countries in Asia. They want to bring seven or eight tigers to live in Cambodia's forests. This would be the first time countries have worked together to bring back tigers, the WWF said. The plan is based on work done in India. Tigers have been brought back there. The plan was approved by Cambodia's government on March 23\. Other countries still have to agree. The plan is to bring in the tigers after two years. First, Cambodia needs to work on other problems. It needs to stop the hunting of tigers. It also needs to stop the hunting of animals that tigers eat.  These problems must be stopped in order to bring back the tigers, said Chhit Sam Ath. He is the head of the WWF in Cambodia.  Chhit Sam Ath said that tigers are important to Cambodia's history. He wants to bring the tigers back. This would be a huge step in protecting them. The plan will cost $20 million to $50 million. This money will be given by countries who want to help. There are many poor people in Cambodia. They hunted the tigers to sell. Some people in China bought the animals. China is a nearby country. Some Chinese buyers believe that parts of tigers are good for the body. They eat them. This has led to more hunting. Tigers are nearly gone worldwide. The WWF says there are only about 3,200 tigers in the wild. They live in just 13 countries around the world.