Cambodia brings back foreign tigers. PHNOM PENH, Cambodia — Cambodia has a plan to reintroduce tigers from different countries into its forests. Cambodia's neighbors, India, Thailand and Vietnam, might provide the tigers. The big cat has been killed in many of these countries. Hunting tigers is against the law. Still, it continues to happen.  Between 20 and 50 tigers once lived in Cambodia's forests. Years of hunting the tigers and their prey have led to the deaths of the tigers. The World Wildlife Fund (WWF) is a group that protects and helps animals. The group said the last time a tiger was spotted in Cambodia was 2007\. This tiger was seen with a camera trap in the forests. The trap holds a hidden camera that detects when animals come near.  "Today, there are no longer any breeding populations of tigers left in Cambodia," the WWF said. All of them have died. Only zoos in Cambodia have tigers. Keo Omaliss is a Cambodian government official in charge of wildlife. He said Cambodia is speaking with the governments of India, Malaysia and Thailand. They want to bring at least seven tigers to live in the protected forests of Cambodia so they can breed and repopulate the forests. This would be the world's first tiger reintroduction plan involving more than one country, the WWF said. Introducing the tigers will be based on what was learned from tiger reintroductions within India. Tigers have been successfully brought back there.  The plan is to bring in the tigers after two years. First, Cambodia needs to solve other tiger problems. These include poaching and rebuilding the population of tiger prey, which will be needed to keep a tiger population, said Chhit Sam Ath, the head of the WWF in Cambodia. These problems must be solved by 2017. If they are not, the tigers will not be brought back until 2018. Chhit Sam Ath said that tigers are important to Cambodia's history. "To bring tigers back to Cambodia would be the biggest conservation feat of its kind." Bringing the tigers would be a big step in animal protection, he said. The entire plan will cost $20 million to $50 million. This money will be given by countries who want to help. Khmer Rouge was the head of the Cambodian government in the 1970s. Its cruel rule left Cambodia devastated. Poor people in the countryside had to search in the forests for wildlife. Many of the tigers they hunted were sold to traders who sent the tiger parts to China. In China, products from many wild animals, including tigers, are believed to have health benefits. This has led to the hunting of tigers. Tigers are nearly gone from the wild worldwide. The WWF has said there are only about 3,200 tigers left in the wild. They are found in just 13 countries globally.