Cambodia brings back foreign tigers. PHNOM PENH, Cambodia — Cambodia has unveiled a plan to reintroduce tigers from abroad into the dry forests of the country. The big cat has become virtually extinct, or wiped out, in these areas. The clearing out of these tigers is due to poaching, conservation officials said Wednesday. Between 20 and 50 tigers are believed to exist in Cambodia's forests. Even though poaching is against the law, it continues to occur. Years of poaching the tigers as well as their prey have led to a dramatic decline in their population. The last tiger spotted in Cambodia was seen in 2007 by a camera trap in the forests of eastern Mondulkiri province, the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) said. The camera trap holds a hidden camera that is remotely triggered by the movement of animals.  "Today, there are no longer any breeding populations of tigers left in Cambodia," a statement by the WWF said. "They are, therefore, considered functionally extinct," and no longer live in the area. The statement was released at a news conference by representatives of the government, the WWF and the Wildlife Alliance, another conservation group. Keo Omaliss is a Cambodian government official in charge of wildlife. He said Cambodia is considering negotiating with the governments of India, Malaysia and Thailand. They want to bring at least seven tigers to live in the protected forests of Mondulkiri so they can breed and repopulate the forests. "This would be the world's first transnational tiger reintroduction" plan, the statement said. The reintroduction will be based on successful tiger reintroductions within India. The plan was approved by Cambodia's government on March 23. The plan is to bring in the tigers after two years. First, Cambodia needs to resolve related problems. These include poaching and rebuilding the population of tiger prey, which will be needed to sustain a tiger population, said Chhit Sam Ath, the director of the WWF in Cambodia. He said the arrival of the tigers could be pushed back to 2018 if the preservation efforts are not completed by 2017. "Tigers are an iconic species and part of our natural heritage," Chhit Sam Ath said. "To bring tigers back to Cambodia would be the biggest conservation feat of its kind." He said bringing back tigers "would support the conservation efforts of the whole landscape." The entire plan will cost $20 million to $50 million, which will come from donor countries. Khmer Rouge was the group running the Cambodian government in the 1970s. Its brutal rule left Cambodia devastated. Poor people were left to scour the forests for wildlife. Many of the tigers they hunted were sold to traders connected to China, where products from many wild animals, including tigers, are believed to possess positive health properties. The entire tiger species has nearly disappeared worldwide as a result. According to the WWF, there are only about 3,200 tigers left in 13 countries globally.