Aquariums have stepped into the eye of the captivity storm: The controversy over continuing to use whales and dolphins for entertainment, or bowing to pressure to stop. ORLANDO, Fla. — For some time now, controversy over keeping large marine mammals in aquariums has been growing. In response, some marine parks are eliminating or scaling back dolphin shows. Some also are facing government crackdowns on whale breeding. The long-running debate over confining marine mammals in aquariums was brought into the spotlight after last year’s documentary film “Blackfish.” It cast SeaWorld in a harsh light. “It sounds like some of these aquariums are not willing to step into the fight. They’re basically giving up, which is not a good sign for SeaWorld,” said Scott Smith, an expert on theme parks. Orlando-based SeaWorld is planning to build bigger tanks for its orcas, also known as killer whales. It currently has no plans to stop shows or breeding at its three theme parks. SeaWorld says its whales and dolphins are healthy and happy. Letting people see them up close, it says, gives visitors an emotional bond with the animals, inspiring them to care more about marine life. “We still have millions of guests coming through our parks wanting to see shows, wanting to connect with animals,” said Chris Dold of SeaWorld. “That doesn’t seem to be changing at all.” Other marine parks are making or seeing changes. Among them: — A city park board this summer voted to end most whale and dolphin breeding at the Vancouver Aquarium. The aquarium is challenging that decision in court. — Baltimore’s National Aquarium stopped using its dolphins in shows in 2012. It announced earlier this year that it is considering creating an ocean retreat for the animals. — Amid controversy about keeping a killer whale without a companion, Six Flags Discovery Kingdom in California sent it to SeaWorld. — Opponents raised concerns that the Clearwater Marine Aquarium would start having dolphins perform when it unveiled plans for a 2,000-seat theater. The aquarium said the seating was meant to let people see staff and dolphins interact, not to watch stunts. However, it recently eliminated the theater, saying it needed to cut costs. In general, “what we certainly have seen is that operators are moving away from shows, or doing more modest … kinds of educational programs,” said Thomas Martin, a Massachusetts expert on attractions, museums and aquariums. They are doing “more intimate kinds of things to show various behavior patterns and things like that,” he said. “I think that’s clearly a trend.” Many facilities still keep whales and dolphins, said William Hurley, past president of the Alliance of Marine Mammal Parks and Aquariums. The Georgia Aquarium, for example, has dolphin shows and is trying to import more beluga whales from Russia. Hurley said some facilities are moving toward more natural encounters. It’s difficult for animal shows to provide the flashier entertainment people want today, he said. “I don’t think it’s an abandoning of the show because the show is bad — I think it’s a change in the business model,” he said. Kelly Flaherty Clark, head of animal training at SeaWorld, said the changes concern her. She and Dold say training for shows keeps captive whales and dolphins mentally and physically healthy. “I’ve seen the effect it has on people who come to the park expecting to have a good time and leave the park being inspired and educated,” Flaherty Clark said. SeaWorld recently announced plans to expand the space devoted to orcas and to create a beachlike environment. Shows featuring orcas at the Shamu Stadium are a major draw. One of those shows’ highlights used to be “rocket hops,” in which whales propel trainers out of the water. Those came to an end after an orca named Tilikum killed trainer Dawn Brancheau at SeaWorld Orlando in 2010. This year, SeaWorld decided to give up fighting a ban that effectively bars trainers from performing in the water with killer whales. After Brancheau’s death, SeaWorld launched a new orca show. As trainers dance on platforms to upbeat music, the whales leap out of the water, bob their heads and raise their tails. Nearby at a smaller stadium, the “Blue Horizons” show features both human acrobats and dolphins. SeaWorld’s renovations of its whale tanks will feature 40-foot glass windows through which guests can watch the orcas swimming. SeaWorld said it also plans changes to a section of the park where guests can see dolphins swim. The changes are not meant to be a substitute for the shows, SeaWorld said. “It doesn’t at all take the focus off the effect the show performances have on our guests,” Flaherty Clark said. SeaWorld revealed the whale-tank plans two days after a disappointing earnings report sent its stock price plunging. SeaWorld said in that report its California park attendance was affected by the debate over keeping whales in confinement. In California, a bill in the legislature was proposed this year that would ban killer whale shows and breeding. The bill was delayed and is being studied further. Its sponsor, Assemblyman Richard Bloom, said the issues are complicated. It will take time, he said, to convince lawmakers that "science, public opinion and common sense" support ending orca breeding and confinement "once and for all."