Aquariums that put on shows, where whales and dolphins do tricks for visitors, are building bigger tanks for the animals. But many people say the animals belong in the ocean, not in fish tanks. ORLANDO, Fla. — Many people feel it is wrong to keep whales and dolphins in aquariums. They say the animals are too large to be happy in a fish tank. They would be much better off living in the wide-open ocean. Many also feel that whales and dolphins should not be forced to do tricks. They say the animals only perform in shows because they are forced to. They would rather be swimming in the ocean. Some aquariums are listening and are changing the way they do things. They are ending or cutting back on dolphin shows. Whales are being given bigger tanks to swim in. Other aquariums do not want to change. SeaWorld is planning to build bigger tanks for its orcas, which are also called killer whales. Still, it has no plans to stop orca shows. SeaWorld says its whales and dolphins are healthy and happy. Letting people see them up close, it says, is a good thing. It makes visitors care more about the animals. Millions of visitors still want to see whale and dolphin shows, said Chris Dold of SeaWorld. “That doesn’t seem to be changing at all.” Changes are being seen at other aquariums, though. For example, Baltimore’s National Aquarium ended dolphin shows in 2012. It also announced that it might move the animals to the ocean. Some people were upset that Six Flags Discovery Kingdom in California kept an orca alone in a tank with no other whales. The aquarium sent the animal to SeaWorld where it was able to live with other whales. Things are indeed changing, but many aquariums continue to keep whales and dolphins. The Georgia Aquarium continues to have dolphin shows. It is also trying to get more whales. Some aquariums keeping the animals are making big changes. They are moving away from whale and dolphin shows. Not everyone is happy about the move away from the popular shows. Kelly Flaherty Clark is head of animal training at SeaWorld. The changes worry her. She said training for shows is good for whales and dolphins. It keeps them mentally and physically healthy, she said. SeaWorld said recently that it will give orcas more room. It also plans to make their living space more like a beach. At SeaWorld's Shamu Stadium, shows featuring orcas are very popular. One of the highlights used to be something called the “rocket hop.” In that act, whales would push trainers out of the water. Rocket hops came to an end in 2010. An orca named Tilikum killed trainer Dawn Brancheau after a show. Her death made SeaWorld decide that the act was not safe because trainers were in the water with the whales. After Brancheau’s death, SeaWorld introduced a new orca show. Trainers now dance on platforms to upbeat music. As they dance, the whales leap out of the water. They bob their heads and raise their tails. There is also a second show at a smaller pool nearby. In that show, human acrobats and dolphins perform together. SeaWorld’s new whale tanks will have 40-foot glass windows. Guests will be able to watch the orcas swimming. SeaWorld said it also plans changes to the dolphin area. The changes are not meant to take the place of the shows, SeaWorld said. SeaWorld may have one big reason for the changes: fewer people are visiting its parks. People upset about the treatment of whales and dolphins are staying away. In California, an idea for a new law was introduced this year. If the law is passed, it would make orca shows against the law. The law has not been voted on yet. Right now, it is being delayed to allow for more time to study it. The law's creator is named Richard Bloom. He said that making a real change is difficult. It will take time to convince the government to act. Nonetheless, many people agree with him. Whales, he said, should not be in aquariums.