Many people believe a park or aquarium is no place for whales and dolphins to live. They say the animals should be in the ocean. Marine parks disagree, and still train them to perform in shows. ORLANDO, Fla. — Many people feel it is wrong to keep whales and dolphins in aquariums. They believe that the animals are simply too large to be happy in a tank, even if it is a big one. In addition, some say that whales and dolphins are too intelligent to be kept in aquariums. They only perform tricks in shows because they are forced to do it, and they would be much better off living in the ocean. Some aquariums are listening and are changing the way they do things. They are ending or reducing dolphin shows. Whales are being given more room. Other aquariums are less eager to change. SeaWorld is planning to build bigger tanks for its orcas, or killer whales. However, it currently has no plans to stop orca shows. SeaWorld says its whales and dolphins are healthy and happy. Letting people see them up close, it says, makes visitors care more about the animals. “We still have millions of guests coming through our parks wanting to see shows,” said Chris Dold of SeaWorld. “That doesn’t seem to be changing at all.” Changes are being seen at other aquariums, though. For example, Baltimore’s National Aquarium ended dolphins shows in 2012. It announced earlier this year that it was considering creating an ocean retreat for the animals. People became upset at Six Flags Discovery Kingdom in California for keeping an orca alone without another orca to keep it company. The aquarium responded by sending the animal to SeaWorld where it was able to live with other whales. Things may be changing, but many aquariums still keep whales and dolphins. The Georgia Aquarium, for example, still has dolphin shows. It is also trying to import more beluga whales from Russia. Some aquariums that are keeping the animals are nonetheless making big changes. They are moving away from whale and dolphin shows. Not everyone is happy about the move away from shows. Kelly Flaherty Clark, head of animal training at SeaWorld, said the changes worry her. She said training for shows is good for whales and dolphins. It keeps them mentally and physically healthy, she said. She also thinks people get a lot out of the shows, and not just entertainment. “I’ve seen the effect it has on people who come to the park," Flaherty Clark said. Visitors who see the shows are "inspired and educated.” SeaWorld recently announced plans to give orcas more room. It also plans to make their living space more like a beach. At SeaWorld's Shamu Stadium, shows featuring orcas are very popular. One of the highlights used to be the so-called “rocket hop.” In that act, whales shot trainers out of the water. Rockets hops came to an end in 2010. In that year, an orca named Tilikum killed trainer Dawn Brancheau at SeaWorld Orlando. After Brancheau’s death, SeaWorld introduced a new orca show. As trainers dance on platforms to upbeat music, the whales leap out of the water. They bob their heads and lift up their tails. Nearby at a smaller pool, human acrobats and dolphins perform together. SeaWorld’s new whale tanks will have 40-foot glass windows. Guests will be able to watch the orcas swimming. SeaWorld said it also plans changes to the dolphin area. The changes are not meant to take the place of the shows, SeaWorld said. SeaWorld may have one big reason for the changes: fewer people are visiting its parks. People are staying away because they are upset about the treatment of whales and dolphins. In California, a new rule was introduced this year that would make orca shows against the law. The law did not get enough yes votes and needs to be studied more by lawmakers. The state official who wrote the possible new law, Richard Bloom, said making a real change is difficult. It will take time to convince the government to act. Nonetheless, more and more people agree that whales should not be in aquariums.