Marine mammals should not be kept in tanks for entertainment, people arguing against that practice say. But one park says its captive whales and dolphins are happy and healthy. ORLANDO, Fla. — For some time now, the belief that it is wrong to keep large marine mammals in aquariums has been growing. In response, some marine parks are eliminating or having fewer dolphin shows. Some also are facing pressure from the government to stop breeding whales. The long-running debate over confining marine mammals was brought into the spotlight after last year’s documentary film “Blackfish”. It was harsh on the marine park SeaWorld. SeaWorld is a park that features marine animals like dolphins and whales. The animals do tricks, though many people think it is cruel to keep the huge sea creatures in tanks much smaller than the vast ocean. Orlando-based SeaWorld is planning to build bigger tanks for its orcas, also known as killer whales. It currently has no plans to stop shows or breeding at its three theme parks. SeaWorld says its whales and dolphins are healthy and happy. Letting people see them up close, it says, gives visitors an emotional bond with the animals, inspiring them to care more about marine life. “We still have millions of guests coming through our parks wanting to see shows, wanting to connect with animals,” said Chris Dold of SeaWorld. “That doesn’t seem to be changing at all.” Other marine parks are making or seeing changes. Among them: — A city park board this summer voted to end most whale and dolphin breeding at the Vancouver Aquarium. The aquarium is going to court to object to the decision. — Baltimore’s National Aquarium stopped using its dolphins in shows in 2012. It announced earlier this year that it is considering creating an ocean retreat for the animals. — After being criticized for keeping a killer whale without a companion, Six Flags Discovery Kingdom in California backed down. It sent the animal to SeaWorld, to live with other whales. — Concerns were raised that the Clearwater Marine Aquarium intended to have dolphins perform in a planned 2,000-seat theater. The aquarium said the seating was meant to let people see staff and dolphins interact, not to watch stunts. However, it recently eliminated the theater, saying it needed to cut costs. In general, “what we certainly have seen is that operators are moving away from shows, or doing more modest … kinds of educational programs,” said Thomas Martin, a Massachusetts expert on aquariums. They are doing more low-key "kinds of things to show various behavior patterns and things like that,” he said. Many aquariums still keep whales and dolphins. The Georgia Aquarium, for example, still has dolphin shows and is trying to import more beluga whales from Russia. Some aquariums are moving toward more natural presentations. It’s difficult these days for animal shows to provide the flashier entertainment people want, said aquarium expert William Hurley. “I don’t think it’s an abandoning of the show because the show is bad. I think it’s a change in the business model,” he said. Kelly Flaherty Clark, head of animal training at SeaWorld, said the changes concern her. She and Dold say training for shows keeps whales and dolphins mentally and physically healthy. “I’ve seen the effect it has on people who come to the park expecting to have a good time," Flaherty Clark said. Visitors who see the shows "leave the park being inspired and educated.” SeaWorld recently announced plans to expand the space devoted to orcas and to create a beachlike environment. Shows featuring orcas at the Shamu Stadium are a major draw. One of the highlights used to be “rocket hops,” in which whales propel trainers out of the water. Those came to an end after an orca named Tilikum killed trainer Dawn Brancheau at SeaWorld Orlando in 2010. This year, SeaWorld gave up fighting a rule that stops trainers from performing in the water with killer whales. After Brancheau’s death, SeaWorld launched a new orca show. As trainers dance on platforms to upbeat music, the whales leap out of the water, bob their heads and raise their tails. Nearby at a smaller stadium, the “Blue Horizons” show features both human acrobats and dolphins. SeaWorld’s renovations of its whale tanks will feature 40-foot glass windows through which guests can watch the orcas swimming. SeaWorld said it also plans changes to the dolphin area. The changes are not meant to be a substitute for the shows, SeaWorld said. “It doesn’t at all take the focus off the effect the show performances have on our guests,” Flaherty Clark said. SeaWorld revealed the whale-tank plans two days after a disappointing company earnings report. SeaWorld said its California park’s attendance was affected by the debate over keeping whales in confinement. In California, a bill in the legislature was proposed this year that would stop killer whale shows and breeding. The bill was delayed and is being studied further. The bill's creator, Assemblyman Richard Bloom, said the issues are complicated. It will take time, he said, to convince lawmakers to act. Nonetheless, "science, public opinion and common sense" all support ending orca breeding and confinement "once and for all."