Big cat remains from almost 6 million years ago add new evidence to help solve a puzzle about where the relatives of lions and tigers and jaguars came from. LOS ANGELES — The bones of a previously unknown type of ancient leopard are shaking up old ideas. They suggest that big cats first arose in Asia, not Africa. Paleontologists, scientists who study ancient bones and other remains known as fossils, discovered the previously unknown species in Tibet in 2010. The newly found leopard is related to the modern snow leopard. The fossils from seven of the cats range in age from 4.1 million to 5.9 million years old. That makes these big cats as much as 2 million years older than any previously known ones. Panthera blytheae was slightly smaller than today's snow leopard. It probably roamed the Tibetan mountains for several million years. There it dined on antelope, pika and blue sheep, according to paleontologist Zhijie Jack Tseng. Tseng was the leader of the new study of the fossils. He is currently working at New York's American Museum of Natural History. The snow leopard and the newly found cat probably represent a separate branch of the cat family, said Tseng. This branch was adapted to life high in the Tibetan mountains. Big cats present serious problems for paleontologists. The cats have been around much longer than modern man has. But they didn't leave behind many fossils. The result is a poor record of the millions of years they've roamed the earth. Scientists don't only study big cats by looking at their bones. They also look at their genes, or DNA. To do this, they look at the DNA of living species. What scientists have found suggests that big cats split off from other cats about 11 million years ago. They then evolved into various separate species. That change happened about 6 million years ago. The big cats became lions, tigers, jaguars and leopards. But there's a problem: What scientists find by looking at big cat genes doesn't agree with what the fossils tell them about where the cats came from. “If you only looked at the fossil, it would suggest Africa," Tseng said. "If you only looked at DNA, it would suggest Asia." Scientists haven't been able to make the two kinds of evidence match up. Scientists hope the fossils from Tibet will solve the problem. Tseng and the others used them to rework the so-called evolutionary tree for big cats. Evolutionary trees trace which species are descended from which, and where they split off. The researchers then matched the new evolutionary tree up with a timeline based on the DNA evidence. What they found supports the theory that the cats arose and flourished in Asia. “We have the oldest but not the most primitive (species)," Tseng said. This "is interesting because it means that there are more primitive cats to be found in the fossil record." These "would be older than the one we have now.” Panthera blytheae was named in honor of Blythe Haaga. She is the daughter of Paul and Heather Haaga. Both parents are longtime supporters of the American Museum of Natural History. Paul is a former museum official. He already had the smallest known dinosaur species named for his family — Fruitadens haagarorum. His wife Heather suggested naming the ancient leopard species for their daughter, Blythe. As a child, Blythe was fascinated with snow leopards. This fascination started after she was given a stuffed toy snow leopard. She now is a comedian and writer splitting her time between Chicago and Los Angeles. The family timed the honor for Blythe's 30th birthday. Blythe found out about her birthday honor as she flew home from Chicago on Monday. Just how important the fossils are was kept quiet until the new study was published. “Now I’m super honored,” she said when told of the study’s findings. “I was just honored before.” The snow leopard “was the stuffed animal that I loved," Blythe said. "Every book report was on snow leopards for a long time after that. It became my fascination for a while.”