Fossils from Tibet show a previously unknown relative of the snow leopard from as long ago as 5.9 million years. Older cat remains could still be out there. LOS ANGELES — The fossil remains of a previously unknown ancient leopard species are shaking up long-held beliefs. According to a new study, they suggest that big cats first arose in Asia, not Africa. Paleontologists, scientists who study fossils, discovered the previously unknown sister species to the modern snow leopard while on a 2010 expedition to Tibet. Seven specimens from three individuals range in age from 4.1 million to 5.9 million years old. That makes them as much as 2 million years older than any previously known big cats. Panthera blytheae was slightly smaller than the snow leopard. It probably roamed the Tibetan plateau for several million years. There it dined on a plentiful supply of antelope, pika and blue sheep, according to paleontologist Zhijie Jack Tseng. Lead author of the new study, Tseng is currently working at New York's American Museum of Natural History. “We think that the snow leopard and this new cat probably represent a new lineage," said Tseng. It was "adapted to the high elevation environment of the Tibetan plateau.” Big cats have presented serious problems for paleontologists: They didn't leave behind many fossils. The result was a poor record of a time span on Earth that exceeded that of modern man by millions of years. Modern genetic research based on living species suggests that big cats split off from other cats about 11 million years ago. They then evolved into various species about 6 million years ago. They became the big cats like lions, tigers, jaguars and leopards. “And that’s the story that the molecular biologists would tell,” Tseng said. “If you only looked at the fossil, it would suggest Africa. If you only looked at DNA, it would suggest Asia." There was no new information to bring the two theories together until now, Tseng said. The team used the new fossils and other specimens to rework the evolutionary tree and match it up with a DNA-based timeline. Enormous gaps still remain in the fossil record. Nonetheless, the newly reconstructed evolutionary tree supports the theory that the big cats arose and flourished in Asia. “We have the oldest but not the most primitive (species)," Tseng said. This "is interesting because it means that there are more primitive cats to be found in the fossil record that would be older than the one we have now.” Panthera blytheae was named in honor of Blythe Haaga, daughter of longtime museum supporters Paul and Heather Haaga. Paul is the former president of the museum’s board of trustees. The smallest known dinosaur species was already named for his family — Fruitadens haagarorum. Heather suggested naming the ancient leopard species for their daughter, Blythe. The younger Haaga became fascinated with snow leopards after receiving a stuffed toy snow leopard as a child. She now is a comic and writer splitting her time between Chicago and Los Angeles. The family timed the honor for Blythe’s 30th birthday. “He’s such a strong supporter of the museum,” said Xiaoming Wang, a paleontologist at the museum. “It’s a tradition among paleontologists to honor our colleagues in this way.” Blythe found out about her birthday honor as she flew home from Chicago on Monday. Details of the significance of the find were kept quiet until the paper was published. “Now I’m super honored,” she said when told of the study’s findings. “I was just honored before.” The snow leopard, Blythe said, “was the stuffed animal that I loved, and therefore every book report was on snow leopards for a long time after that. It became my fascination for a while.”