Fossils found in Tibet show a previously unknown leopard species from as long as 5.9 million years ago, moving back the evolutionary clock. LOS ANGELES — The fossil remains of a previously unknown ancient leopard species are shaking up long-held beliefs. According to a new study, they suggest that big cats first roamed in Asia, not Africa. Paleontologists discovered the previously undescribed sister species to the modern snow leopard while on a 2010 expedition to Tibet. Seven specimens from three individuals range in age from 4.1 million to 5.9 million years old. The new study says the specimens dial back the clock on big cat evolution by as much as 2 million years. The study was published online on Tuesday in Proceedings of the Royal Society B. Panthera blytheae, as the new species is called, was slightly smaller than the snow leopard. It probably roamed the Tibetan plateau for several million years, dining on an ample supply of antelope, pika and blue sheep, according to paleontologist Zhijie Jack Tseng. Lead author of the paper, Tseng is currently a postdoctoral fellow at New York's American Museum of Natural History. “We think that the snow leopard and this new cat probably represent a new lineage that was adapted to the high elevation environment of the Tibetan plateau,” said Tseng. Big cats have presented serious problems for paleontologists. The ancient ambush hunters’ preferred habitat proved unproductive for fossilization. The result was a poor record of a time span on Earth that exceeded that of modern man by millions of years. Modern genetic sleuthing based on living species suggests that big cats diverged from other cats about 11 million years ago. They then radiated into multiple species — lion, tiger, jaguar, leopard — about 6 million years ago. But the evidence is contradictory when it comes to the question of where big cats originated, Tseng said. “If you only looked at the fossil, it would suggest Africa. If you only looked at DNA, it would suggest Asia. So there was no new material to reconcile this difference until now.” The team used the new fossils and other specimens to recalibrate the evolutionary tree and match it up with a DNA-based timeline. Although enormous gaps remain in the fossil record, the newly reconstructed evolutionary tree lends weight to the theory that the cats arose and flourished in Asia. “We have the oldest but not the most primitive (species)," Tseng said. This "is interesting because it means that there are more primitive cats to be found in the fossil record that would be older than the one we have now.” Panthera blytheae was named in honor of Blythe Haaga, daughter of longtime museum supporters Paul and Heather Haaga. The former president of the museum’s board of trustees, Paul already had the smallest known dinosaur species named for his family — Fruitadens haagarorum. Heather suggested naming the ancient leopard species for their daughter, Blythe, who became fascinated with snow leopards after receiving a plush toy replica as a child. She now is an improv comic and writer splitting her time between Chicago and Los Angeles. The family timed the honor for Blythe’s 30th birthday. “He’s such a strong supporter of the museum,” said Xiaoming Wang, curator of vertebrate paleontology at the museum. “It’s a tradition among paleontologists to honor our colleagues in this way.” Blythe found out about her birthday honor as she flew home from Chicago on Monday. Details of the significance of the find were closely held until publication. “Now I’m super honored,” she said when told of the study’s findings. “I was just honored before.” The snow leopard, Blythe said, “was the stuffed animal that I loved, and therefore every book report was on snow leopards for a long time after that. It became my fascination for a while.”