The cat bones are 5,300 years old. They were found in an ancient Chinese village. The discovery helps experts understand how, and when, cats became pets. Scientists in China have found new evidence of how cats became pets. Their discovery shows cats first began living among humans about 5,300 years ago. Dogs had already been tamed thousands of years before. The discovery helps experts understand how cats became pets. But, it also confused them. The remains were found in an ancient Chinese village. Scientists didn't think they would be there. That's because every house cat in the world comes from the same type of wildcat. And that type is a Middle Eastern wildcat. Those cats lived very far from China 5,300 years ago. Fiona Marshall worked on the discovery. She's a scientist at Washington University in St. Louis. Her job is to study ancient remains of animals. Marshall says Middle Eastern wildcats wouldn't have naturally traveled to China. So, how did the cats get there? Were they brought from the Middle East by people? Maybe because they were cute? Or, did the Chinese kitties come from an Asian type of wildcat? And were they later pushed to move somewhere else? Or maybe they were wiped out? Marshall and her partners will do DNA tests. DNA holds the code for every cell in your body. And it tells cells what to do. DNA is also in plants and animals. Scientists hope DNA tests will clear things up. Until then, experts will wonder what cat is this? And where did it come from? The discovery was of eight bones. They came from at least two cats. They were found in ancient garbage pits. Other animal remains, pottery pieces, and tools were also in the pits. The bones in the pits piled up over about 200 years. It supports the view that cats began living near people when farming began. The bones are about the same size as those of European house cats. But they're smaller than those of European wildcats. Part of a jawbone from one Chinese cat had very worn teeth. So, it was probably old. And that it would have needed help to live to such an old age. Other signs come from bone tests. Scientists can examine chemicals found in bones. They can see whether the cats mostly ate plants. Or if they ate meat. Tests showed that one Chinese cat appeared to eat a lot of grains. Cats living in the wild who eat meat probably wouldn't eat much grain. That could mean that this cat couldn't hunt. Maybe it ate food humans threw away. Or, maybe it was looked after and fed by people. Scientists think that cats started to become more like pets because of farms. Wildcats were probably drawn to farming areas. There were plenty of food scraps there. And there was an easy supply of rats and mice. Ancient humans probably let cats stick around because they got rid of rats and mice. The theory makes sense. But, proving it has been difficult. The oldest evidence of cats living near humans is from 9,500 years ago. It was on the island of Cyprus. Scientists discovered the full skeleton of a wildcat there. It was buried near a human. The closeness of the skeletons to each other suggests the cat might have been tamed, experts say. Another record of cats living with people came from ancient Egypt. Paintings and writings were found in 4,000-year-old tombs that people were buried in. They described cats being kept as pets in the homes of the rich.