Cat vs. dog loyalties and domestication likely began thousands of years ago Are you a dog person or a cat person?  The question usually means you have to pick one or the other. The debate over preferring cats versus dogs is not new.  People might have been divided by their pet-preferences for thousands of years.  Although cats and dogs might seem very different from one another, they are actually related. Cats and dogs share a common ancestor or relative. This ancestry is also shared by many other animals, large and small. Cats and dogs belong to the same group of animals called Carnivora. These animals are called carnivorans. They include bears, hyenas and skunks. Sea animals, such as seals, walruses and sea lions, are part of this group, too. These animals all share a special set of teeth. Their teeth are sharp and bite together to help them eat food, especially meat. The ancestors that Carnivora have are from a group of animals called miacids. These were small, long-bodied animals. They lived in trees across two continents. One was Eurasia, which includes both Europe and Asia. Then, there was North America. They appeared only a few million years after the extinction of the dinosaurs and lived for more than 25 million years. There were two groups that lived before the Carnivora with special teeth that they used to eat meat, one of which was called the creodontans. They included the largest land animal predators of all time.  But their teeth were slightly different than the Carnivora. This means they probably hunted and ate meat separately from the Carnivora group of animals. The last known creodontan died out 8 million years ago. At that point, the carnivorans were already ruling the hunting world.   There was a second group of meat-eaters called the mesonychids. They had their own kind of cutting and crushing teeth that helped them to eat meat. The earliest of these animals walked on flat feet, but some of the later ones walked on their toes like cats and dogs.  Scientists thought mesonychids might be related to sea animals. This is because they shared tooth and skull characteristics with whales and dolphins. They might also share a common ancestor along with hippos. Mesonychids and creodontans were the top predators in their time. Both were replaced by Carnivora. It’s unclear exactly why this happened, but it could be because of their larger brains, better movement, and more useful teeth. Although they share a common ancestor, the Carnivora are split into two groups around 43 million years ago. One group is mainly dog-like and called the caniformia. The other is the mainly cat-like, called the feliformia. The feliforms tend to be more specialized meat-eaters, with shorter faces and claws that come out. They include meerkats and mongooses, as well as big cats and hyenas. The caniformia includes dogs, wolves and jackals, all of which split from their dog-like relatives early on. The rest of caniformia are very different and include bears and sea animals. Skunks, weasels, otters and raccoons are also part of this group. Recent studies have been exploring the beginnings of cats and dogs. Dogs trace their beginnings to an ancestor shared with modern gray wolves. The first time a wolf became domesticated or treated as a pet probably happened a very long time ago in Eurasia.  This could have been as long as 41,000 years ago. Cats have not been studied as much. But recently, a team of scientists from around the world studied both ancient and modern cats from Europe, Asia and Africa.  People made cats their pets a long time ago. It happened in Ancient Egypt more than 2,000 years ago. In time, people began breeding different kinds of cats.  Perhaps whether you like cats or dogs more comes from which of their cousins you like more. Either way, there is much to appreciate in both branches of Carnivora.