Or, as any cat lover would put it, when the aloof felines decided to allow humans to live alongside them. Archaeologists working in China have found the first clear evidence of cats living among humans. Their discovery shows felines helped humans kill mice about 5,300 years ago. It's the missing link in the history of the world's most popular pet, experts say. The evidence, published Monday, supports the long-held view that cats began their relationship with people just after humans developed agriculture. Dogs had already been tamed by nomadic hunter-gatherers many thousands of years before. The discovery fills in an enormous gap in experts' understanding of how cats were domesticated, or became pets. But, it has also thrown them a curve. In some ways, an ancient Chinese village is the last place researchers expected to find such evidence. "This was a very unexpected find," said study co-author Fiona Marshall. She studies the ancient remains of animals as a professor at Washington University in St. Louis. Today, every domestic cat in the world comes from a single type of Middle Eastern wildcat. Whether they are stalking an alley, starring in a YouTube video or sitting in your living room – they all come from the same place. Marshall and her partners note that the ancient village of Quanhucun, in central China, is far beyond that cat's natural range. That raises the question of just how the cats got there. Were they imported from the Middle East as novelties? Were the Quanhucun kitties descended from an Asian type of wildcat and later got wiped out? Marshall and her partners hope upcoming DNA tests will clear up matters. DNA holds the code for every cell in your body and tells cells what to do. DNA is also in plants and animals. In the meantime, experts have been left to wonder. "The question everyone has is, what cat is this and where did it come from?" said cat origin expert Carlos Driscoll, who was not involved in the study. "The key ingredient that's missing here is DNA evidence." The discovery consisted of eight bones from at least two cats. They were found in ancient trash pits along with other animal remains, broken pottery pieces and tools. The bones in the pits piled up over about 200 years, they wrote. Researchers emphasized several factors that suggest the remains belonged to cats that had developed a unique relationship with farmers. The bones are similar in size to those of European house cats, they reported. But they're smaller than those of European wildcats. Part of a jawbone from one of the Quanhucun cats has very worn teeth. That suggests that it was quite elderly and would have needed help to survive to such a ripe old age, they added. Other evidence comes from bone tests. By examining the carbon and nitrogen found in bones, scientists can determine where an animal fell in the food chain. They can see whether its diet consisted mostly of plants or of meat. Tests showed that one of the Chinese cats appeared to eat more millet, or grain, than would be expected of a meat-eater living in the wild. That could mean that this cat was unable to hunt. Maybe it ate food humans threw away "or that it was looked after and fed by people," the study said. Scientists have long speculated that cats became human pets because of agriculture. Wildcats, they believe, were probably drawn to farming settlements. There were plenty of food scraps available and a ready supply of rats and mice. Ancient humans probably allowed cats to stick around because they got rid of rats and mice. The theory makes sense, but proving it has been difficult. The oldest evidence of a special bond between the two species dates back 9,500 years to the island of Cyprus. There, archaeologists discovered the full skeleton of a wildcat buried near a human. The closeness of the two skeletons to each other suggests the cat might have been tamed, experts say. Until now, the next-oldest record of cats living with people came from ancient Egypt. Paintings and writings in 4,000-year-old tombs described cats being kept as pets in the homes of the wealthy. Unlike the Egyptian cats, which were often shown sitting under chairs, the cats of Quanhucun were hardly house cats. They were probably more like the cats that live in today's parking garages: creatures wary of people but also needing them for an occasional handout or carelessly dropped garbage. "There's nothing to show us that there was anything more than an alley cat type of relationship in this village," Marshall said. Many experts say cats were attracted to early agricultural settlements by the rats and mice that raided grain supplies. But, Driscoll said he believes trash was the bigger draw. Once people gave up their wandering, hunter-gatherer ways, their agricultural settlements became like buffets for cats. "Cats are dumpster divers par excellence," he said.