Cat vs. dog loyalties and domestication likely began thousands of years ago Are you a dog person, or a cat person? The question usually implies you have to pick one or the other. So, if you appreciate the loyalty of a pooch, you can't also enjoy the picky companionship of a kitty. Recent studies suggest people could have been divided by their pet-preferences since the Stone Age. But, cats and dogs are actually related to one another. They share a common ancestor, or relative, and this ancestry is also shared by many other animals, large and small. Our beloved pets belong to the same order, or group called Carnivora. Animals in this order are called carnivorans. They include bears, hyenas, mongooses, skunks, badgers and sea animals, such as seals, walruses and sea lions. The key feature these animals share is their teeth, which are blade-like and bite together to shear through food. This might be meat or plants, depending on the animal. Carnivora has a group of ancestors called miacids. These were small, long-bodied animals that lived in trees all around Eurasia and North America. They appeared only a few million years after the extinction of the dinosaurs and lived for more than 25 million years. There were two other main animal groups with special teeth that lived before the Carnivora group. The group called the creodontans included the largest land animal predators of all time.  But their teeth were slightly different than the Carnivora. This suggests they hunted and ate meat separately from Carnivora across Eurasia, Africa, and North America. The last known creodontan died out 8 million years ago, by which point carnivorans had taken over the hunting world. The second main animal group of meat-eaters was the mesonychids from Asia. They had their own unique cutting and crushing teeth to eat meat rather than blade-like teeth. The earliest species walked on flat feet, but some of the later ones walked on their toes like cats and dogs.   Scientists thought mesonychids might be related to marine animals. This is because they share tooth and skull characteristics with whales and dolphins. A more recent study suggests they share a common ancestor along with hippos. Mesonychids and creodontans were the top-predators in their time. Both were replaced by Carnivora, one of the most successful animal groups on Earth. It is unclear exactly why the carnivorans replaced their ancestors, but it could be because of their larger brains, better movement, and more useful teeth. Although they share a common ancestor, the Carnivora are split into two groups around 43 million years old. One is broadly dog-like and called the caniformia. The other is very cat-like and called the feliformia. The feliforms tend to be more specialized meat-eaters, with shorter faces and claws that come out. They include meerkats and mongooses, as well as the larger true cats and hyenas. The caniformia includes dogs, wolves and jackals, all of which split from their dog-like relatives early on. The rest of caniformia are strikingly different and include bears and marine animals. Skunks, weasels, badgers, otters and raccoons are also part of this group. Recent research has been exploring the origins of cats and dogs. Dogs trace their origins to an ancestor shared with modern gray wolves. The first domestication of wolves probably occurred somewhere in Eurasia, possibly as long as 41,000 years ago. Cats have not been studied as much as their rivals, dogs. But their domestication took place later and was less intense.  Recently, an international team of researchers carried out a DNA study on modern and ancient cats from across Europe, Asia and Africa. They think waves of cat appreciation started in the East and spread via trade routes across the Old World during the Egyptian dynasties. Later, people began breeding cats for certain features, such as fur color. It could be that your preference for cats or dogs comes from which of their cousins you like more. If you like cats or dogs, maybe you should ask about their cousins, skunks or mongooses?  Either way, there is much to appreciate in both branches of Carnivora animals.