Cat vs. dog loyalties and domestication likely began thousands of years ago Are you a dog person, or a cat person? The question usually implies you have to pick one or the other – if you appreciate the loyalty of a pooch, you can't also enjoy the finicky companionship of a kitty. Recent studies suggest people could have been divided by their pet-preferences since the Stone Age. In evolutionary terms, cats and dogs are not so different. They belong together and are related to one another by a common ancestor and they share this ancestry with a whole suite of other animals, large and small. Our beloved pets belong to the same order, or group called Carnivora. Animals in this order are called carnivorans. They include bears, hyenas, mongooses, skunks, badgers, and sea mammals, such as seals, walruses, and sea lions. These animals share various features, but the key one that sets them apart from other animals is their teeth. Their teeth are blade-like and bite together to shear through food, which is especially good for predatory animals that eat meat like bears. However, some other carnivorans such as the giant panda eat a mostly vegetarian diet of bamboo.  So what ancestral family photograph do all of these seemingly different animals have mounted on the wall at home? The ancestors of Carnivora are from a group of animals called miacids, once found across Eurasia and North America. They were small, long-bodied creatures and at home in the trees. The exact relationships among these miacids remain unclear, but we know they appeared only a few million years after the extinction of the dinosaurs and lived for more than 25 million years. There were two other dominant mammal groups with special teeth to prey on animals prior to Carnivora. The creodontans included the largest land mammal predators of all time. However, their carnassial teeth comprised only molars unlike the premolars and molars of the carnivorans. This suggests they hunted and ate meat separately from Carnivora across Eurasia, Africa and North America. The last known creodontan died out 8 million years ago, by which point carnivorans had taken over the hunting world. There was also another group of meat-eaters from Asia that was spread across the Northern Hemisphere: the mesonychids. They didn’t have blade-like teeth at all, but had their own unique cutting and crushing molars to process meat. While the earliest species walked on flat feet, some of the later ones walked on their toes like cats and dogs – except that they had hooves on each toe. Scientists thought mesonychids, which share many tooth and skull characteristics with whales and dolphins, might be these marine mammals’ ancestors. A more recent study suggests they are sister groups, sharing a common ancestor along with hippos. Mesonychids and creodontans were the top-predators in their time, but both were replaced by Carnivora, one of the most successful animal groups on Earth. It is unclear exactly why the carnivorans replaced their ancestors, but it could be because of their larger brains, more efficient motion and more useful teeth. Although they share a common ancestor, the Carnivora are split into two quite well-defined groups that are broadly dog-like, the caniformia, and broadly cat-like, the feliformia. This division is around 43 million years old. The feliformia tend to be more specialized meat-eaters, have shorter faces, retractable claws, and ambush and pounce on their predators. They include meerkats and mongooses, as well as the larger true cats and hyenas. The caniformia includes dogs, wolves and jackals, all of which split from their dog-like relatives early on. The rest of caniformia are strikingly different and include bears and marine animals. Skunks, weasels, badgers, otters and raccoons are also part of this group. Recent research has been exploring the origins of cats and dogs. Dogs have received a lot of attention, tracing their origins to an ancestor shared with modern gray wolves. The first domestication of wolves probably occurred somewhere in Eurasia, possibly as long as 41,000 years ago. Cats have not been studied as much as their rival. But, their domestication took place later and was less intense. Recently, an international team led by researchers at KU-Leuven University in Belgium carried out DNA analyses on modern and ancient cats from across Europe, Asia and Africa.  Their evidence suggests waves of cat appreciation started in the near East and spread via trade routes across the Old World during the Egyptian dynasties. But, it was only after the Middle Ages from the fifth to the 15th centuries that people began breeding cats for traits such as the color of their fur. So, shall we pit the whole of dog-like Carnivora against the cat-like ones? Perhaps your preference for pooches extends to their cousins, and you find yourself naturally drawn to skunks over mongooses? I’ll leave it to you to ponder your loyalties and pose your own who-would-win-in-a fight questions. There is much to appreciate in both branches of Carnivora.  The huge diversity of cat and dog relatives pays testament to the successful evolution shared by these two popular pets.