Fossils found in an ancient village support the long-held view that cats began their close relationship with people shortly after humans first developed agriculture and settled down. Archaeologists in China have unearthed the first clear evidence of cats living among humans as mouse hunters about 5,300 years ago. It's the missing link in the history of the world's most popular pet, experts say. The evidence, published Monday, supports the long-held view that cats began their close relationship with people shortly after humans first developed agriculture. Dogs had already been tamed by nomadic hunter-gatherers many thousands of years before. The discovery fills in an enormous gap in experts' understanding of cat domestication, or how they became pets. But, it has also thrown them for a curve, because an ancient Chinese village is the last place researchers expected to find such evidence. "This was a very unexpected find," said study co-author Fiona Marshall, a zooarchaeologist who teaches at Washington University in St. Louis. Today, every domestic cat in the world — whether it's starring in a YouTube video or climbing into an empty box in your living room — is descended from a single subspecies of Middle Eastern wildcat. It's known as Felis silvestris lybica. Marshall and her partners note that the ancient village of Quanhucun, in central China, is far beyond Felis silvestris lybica's natural range. That raises the question of just how the cats got there. Were they imported from the Middle East as novelties? Were the Quanhucun kitties descended from an Asian subspecies of wildcat, Felis silvestris ornata, and later displaced or wiped out? Marshall and her partners hope upcoming DNA analysis will clarify matters. In the meantime, experts have been left to wonder. "The question everyone has is, what cat is this and where did it come from?" said biologist and cat origin expert Carlos Driscoll, who was not involved in the study. "The key ingredient that's missing here is DNA evidence." The discovery consisted of eight fossilized bones from at least two cats that were found in ancient trash pits along with other animal remains, broken pottery pieces and tools. The bones in the pits accumulated over about 200 years, they wrote. Researchers emphasized several factors that suggest the remains belonged to cats that had developed a unique relationship with long-ago farmers. The bones are comparable in size to those of European house cats, but smaller than those of European wildcats, they reported. A partial jawbone from one of the Quanhucun cats has very worn teeth. That suggests that it was quite elderly and would have needed help to survive to such a ripe old age, they added. Other indications come from examining the carbon and nitrogen in bone collagen. By examining the ratio of carbon and nitrogen isotopes in bone collagen, scientists can determine where an animal fell in the food chain and whether its diet consisted mostly of plants or of meat. Tests showed that one of the Chinese cats appeared to eat more millet, or grain, than would be expected of a carnivore living in the wild. That raises "the possibility that this cat was unable to hunt and scavenged for discarded human food or that it was looked after and fed by people," the study said. Scientists have long speculated that cat domestication was related to agriculture. Wildcats, they believe, were probably drawn to farming settlements by the promise of food scraps and a ready supply of rats and mice. Prehistoric humans probably tolerated the cats because they hunted rats and mice, and so they allowed them to stick around. The theory makes sense, but proving it has been difficult — and the aloof nature of cats hasn't helped. "The impact of domestication is difficult to tell from archaeological remains. Actually, it's hard to tell when you have the living damn cat, because they retain so much of their native behaviors," said Melinda Zeder. She's an expert on animal domestication at the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History in Washington. She was not involved in the study. Yet Zeder said it appeared to be the first to demonstrate a beneficial relationship between cats and humans and was therefore significant. The oldest evidence of a special bond between the two species dates back 9,500 years to the island of Cyprus. There, archaeologists discovered the full skeleton of a wildcat buried near a human. The closeness of the two skeletons suggests the cat might have been tamed, experts say. Until now, the next-oldest record of cats living with people came from ancient Egypt, where 4,000-year-old tomb paintings and writings described cats being kept as pets in the homes of the wealthy. Unlike the Egyptian cats, which were often depicted sitting under chairs, the cats of Quanhucun were hardly house cats. They were probably more like the cats that live in today's parking garages: creatures wary of people but also reliant on them for an occasional handout or carelessly dropped garbage. "There's nothing to show us that there was anything more than an alley cat type of relationship in this village," Marshall said. In fact, although many experts say cats were attracted to early agricultural settlements by the rats and mice that raided grain stores, Driscoll said he believes trash was the bigger draw. Once people gave up their wandering, hunter-gatherer ways, their agricultural settlements became like buffets for cats. "Cats are dumpster divers par excellence" he said.