Cheetah numbers are on the decline A group of passionate scientists is calling on the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) to list the cheetah as endangered. Endangered status is a label that means an animal faces the risk of extinction in the wild. The IUCN is considered the worldwide authority on these statuses. Researchers released a new study on December 11 with updated numbers of the cheetah population. The study focuses on cheetahs in southern Africa, the cheetah's largest remaining habitat. Based on prior observations, the team says there are at least 3,577 adult cheetahs in the region. There is a buffer area, or extra land surrounding the observed habitat, that could support a few thousand more. This is believed to be the largest population of wild cheetahs in the world. As it stands, the species is officially listed as vulnerable, one step above endangered status.  Florian Weise, a leader of the study, says that big cats are suffering around the world as their habitats are taken over for human needs, such as farming and construction.  The paper gives two estimates for cheetah populations. The first is based on scientific data and tourist observations recorded between 2010 and 2016\. From these data, Weise and the researchers counted 3,577 wild adult cheetahs spread across four southern African countries. Altogether, the combined cheetah habitats found in Namibia, Botswana, South Africa and Zimbabwe is about the size of France. The second estimate applied to a similarly sized buffer area of remote land. Scientists believe the land could potentially hold another 3,250 cheetahs. Combined, the paper's estimate is — optimistically — about 6,800 African cheetahs. These numbers are down from the 15,000 cheetahs counted in southern Africa in 1975. Co-author Varsha Vijay is more confident in the lower estimate because it is based on actual sightings and observations. The higher estimate is harder to prove because it relies on a large assumption, Vijay says. The assumption is that there are as many cheetahs in the buffer area as the observed area.  Humans have altered more than 90 percent of the cheetah's habitat. The habitat once ranged across stretches of Africa and Asia. Today, the cats are mostly restricted to private land in six African countries, with a smaller population in East Africa. Overall, cheetah populations are decreasing.  The study found that only 18.4 percent of the southern African cheetahs live on internationally recognized protected land. There, the animals cannot be hunted or captured. Most of the big cats live in unprotected areas used by humans for livestock and game production. Livestock animals are raised for meat and game animals are raised for hunting. People have changed the land that cheetahs used to prowl. Farmers will sometimes kill the animals if they're seen as threatening to livestock, though the big cats rarely go after domesticated animals. Cheetahs are also hit by cars and poached for bush meat. In general, the IUCN will change a species from vulnerable to endangered for two reasons. Both are based on mathematical models. The first model looks at recent population loss. The second looks at expected population loss. If the animal has lost 50 to 70 percent of its population over 10 years or three generations, it can be listed as endangered. If a numerical study can prove the species has a 20 percent chance of becoming extinct within the next five generations, or 20 years, it can officially be labeled as endangered. According to Weise, a change in status is very important. "It just generates a whole lot more attention for a species that has been listed vulnerable for a long, long time," Weise says. There's already a historical example of cheetah extinction. A subspecies of Asiatic cheetahs, similar to their African cousins, are the world's most critically endangered big cats.  Asiatic cheetahs once roamed India, Pakistan, Afghanistan and Central Asia. Today, they can only be spotted in protected pockets of Iran's national parks. As of August 2016, fewer than 40 Asiatic cheetahs remained in the wild. Their numbers are so low that they were once thought to be extinct, until they were discovered in Iranian deserts. Iran has tried to protect its cheetahs by launching conservation programs. One example is its work to put more cheetah prey in the wild. The country has also raised awareness for the animal. It printed a picture of the cat on its soccer team's jerseys and worked with the Iranian actress Hedieh Tehrani to spread the word. Weise says that if the cheetah's conservation status is changed, it will take a few years for countries to adapt. Governments will have to come up with rules to protect the cats. It could take five to 10 years for new laws to develop. This new study is critical because it gives people hard numbers to base their decisions on. "It's a red flag there is a problem," Weise says.