Cheetah numbers are on the decline A group of passionate scientists wants the cheetah to be listed as endangered. Endangered status is a label that means an animal risks extinction in the wild. Extinction is when an entire species dies off.  Scientists released a new study with updated numbers of the cheetah population. The study focuses on cheetahs in southern Africa. Southern Africa is the cheetah's largest remaining habitat, or home.  The new study says there are at least 3,577 adult cheetahs in the region. It is believed to be the largest population of wild cheetahs anywhere in the world. The species is officially listed as vulnerable, one step above endangered status.  Florian Weise, a leader of the study, says that big cats are suffering around the world. Their habitats are being taken over for human purposes. These include farming and construction of new buildings.  Humans have changed more than 90 percent of the cheetah's habitat. The habitat once stretched across parts of Africa and Asia. Today, the cats mostly live in six African countries, with a smaller population in East Africa. Overall, their populations are decreasing. The study found that less than one quarter of the southern African cheetah range lives on internationally recognized protected land. There, the animal cannot be hunted or captured. Most of the big cats, however, live in unprotected areas. These areas are used by humans for livestock and game production. Livestock animals are raised for meat. Game animals are raised for hunting. Farmers will sometimes kill cheetahs if they think they're hurting livestock. Big cats rarely go after domesticated animals, though. Cheetahs are also hit by cars and killed for meat. A species can go from vulnerable to endangered for two reasons that both depend on math. One reason is recent population loss. The second is future chance of extinction. If 50 to 70 percent of the animal's population has disappeared over the last 10 years, it will be moved to endangered. If the species has a 20 percent chance of becoming extinct within the next 20 years, it can be labeled as endangered. According to Weise, a change in status is very important. People start to care more. "It just generates a whole lot more attention for a species that has been listed vulnerable for a long, long time," Weise says. There's already a historical example of cheetah extinction. Asiatic cheetahs are a group of cheetahs. They are the world's most critically endangered big cats. Asiatic cheetahs once roamed areas in Central and South Asia. The area included countries like India, Pakistan and Afghanistan. Today, these cheetahs can only be spotted in protected parts of Iran's national parks. As of August 2016, fewer than 40 Asiatic cheetahs remained in the wild. Their numbers are so low that they were once thought to be extinct. However, they were then discovered in Iranian deserts. Iran has tried to protect its cheetahs by launching conservation programs. These programs try to bring the species back to a healthy population. One program put more cheetah prey in the wild. The country also raised awareness for the animal. It printed a picture of the cat on its soccer team's jerseys. The Iranian actress Hedieh Tehrani also spread the word on the animals' situation. Weise says that the process for change could be slow. If the cheetah's conservation status is changed, it will take a few years for countries to catch up. Governments will have to make decisions that line up with international rules on protecting the cats. This process could take many years.  Nonetheless, new information is important. It gives people hard numbers to base their decisions on. "It's a red flag there is a problem," Weise says.