Cheetah numbers are on the decline A group of passionate scientists have come together to demand that the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) list the cheetah as endangered. The IUCN is considered the worldwide authority on species conservation status, a label that describes the health of a species. Researchers released a new study on December 11 with updated numbers of the cheetah population in southern Africa. Southern Africa is the cheetah's largest remaining habitat. Pulling from millions of pieces of data from prior observations, the team says there are at least 3,577 adult cheetahs in the region. There is a buffer area, or extra land surrounding the observed habitat, that could support a few thousand more. That number is the largest population of wild cheetahs in the world, but it is less than half of an estimate published just over a year ago. As it stands, the species is officially listed as vulnerable, one step above endangered status.  "Around the world, big cats are suffering big losses and having big trouble in more and more human-dominated landscapes," says study co-lead author Florian Weise. The paper gives two estimates for cheetah populations. The estimate comes from analysis of more than 2 million pieces of scientific data and 20,000 crowd-sourced observations from tourists between 2010 and 2016\. According to these numbers, Weise and the researchers counted 3,577 free-ranging adults spread across less than 305,000 square miles of Namibia, Botswana, South Africa and Zimbabwe. That's a few thousand cheetahs for an area about the size of France. They also identified a similarly sized buffer area of remote land that could potentially hold another 3,250 cheetahs. Combined, the paper's estimate is  — optimistically — about 6,800 African cheetahs.  Another study released last year estimated there were 7,100 cheetahs in the region. Both these numbers are down from the 15,000 cheetahs counted in southern Africa in 1975. Co-lead author Varsha Vijay is more confident in the lower estimate because it is based on sightings and estimates in an observed area. The higher estimate is harder to prove because it relies on a large assumption, Vijay says. The assumption is that potential cheetah habitats — the buffer zones — have as many cheetahs as the other areas. The 2016 paper, along with other conservation groups, called for the cheetah's status to be changed from "vulnerable" to "endangered." Endangered status means the animal runs a high risk of going extinct in the wild. Humans have altered more than 90 percent of the cheetah's historic habitat, which once ranged across stretches of Africa and Asia. Today, the cats are mostly restricted to private land on six African countries, with a smaller population in East Africa. Overall, their populations are decreasing.  The study found that only 18.4 percent of the southern African cheetah range is within internationally recognized protected land, such as South Africa's Kruger National Park. Most of the big cats live in areas allocated for livestock and game production. Livestock are farm animals raised for meat or other resources and game animals are raised for hunting. "We are all very concerned about these small populations outside of protected areas," says Laurie Marker, who was not part of the new study. "The majority of the cheetahs through southern Africa are not in protected areas, and that makes them extremely vulnerable."  People have repurposed the land that cheetahs used to prowl for agriculture and livestock uses. Farmers will sometimes kill the animals if they're perceived as threatening livestock, though the big cats rarely go after domesticated animals. Cheetahs are also hit by cars and poached for bush meat. In general, the IUCN will change a species from vulnerable to endangered based on two mathematical models. The first is if there's a decline in 50 to 70 percent of the population over 10 years or three generations (whichever is longer). They can also apply the status based on a future prediction. If a quantitative analysis, a study based on numbers, can show the species has a 20 percent chance of becoming extinct within the next five generations (or 20 years), it can officially be labeled as endangered. According to Weise, a change in status is very important. "It affords them a lot more protection on an international level, recognizing that the general population trend is downwards," Weise says. "It just generates a whole lot more attention for a species that has been listed vulnerable for a long, long time." There's already a  historical example of cheetah extinction. A subspecies of Asiatic cheetahs, similar to their African cousins, are the world's most critically endangered big cats.  They're similar to their African cousins, but slightly slimmer and with longer legs. Asiatic cheetahs once roamed all through India, Pakistan, Afghanistan and Central Asia. Today, however, they can only be spotted in protected pockets of Iranian national parks. As of August 2016, fewer than 40 Asiatic cheetahs remained in the wild. Their numbers are so low that they were once thought to be extinct, until they were discovered in Iranian deserts. Iran has taken steps to protect its cheetahs by launching conservation programs to replenish the animals' supply of prey. The country has also worked to raise awareness for the animal. It printed a picture of the cat on its soccer team's jerseys and worked with Iranian actress Hedieh Tehrani to inform more people about them.  Weise says that if the cheetah's conservation status is changed, it will take a few years for the countries' governments to adopt international policies to protect the cats. Governments will have to analyze the paper's results and decide how important cheetah conservation is for their countries. It could take five to 10 years for new laws to develop new plans. This new data is critical because it gives people hard numbers to base their decisions on. "It puts them on the agenda," Weise says. "It's a red flag there is a problem."