Cheetah numbers are on the decline A group of scientists wants the cheetah to be listed as endangered. They are worried about the cheetahs.   The scientists are worried that cheetahs could go extinct in the wild. That means there wouldn't be any left.  The scientists counted how many cheetahs are left. They had to make estimates, or educated guesses. That's because there is no way to count every single cheetah. The scientists estimated that 6,800 African cheetahs live in one area. The area is in southern Africa. It is the cheetah's largest habitat, or home. In 1975, there were more than 15,000 cheetahs there.  Humans have changed most of the cheetah's habitat. Cheetah once lived across much of Africa. They lived in Asia, too. Today, the cats mostly live in six African countries. Their populations are going down. They are labelled "vulnerable." This means they are in need of special protection. A species that is "vulnerable" is not as close to going extinct as a species that is "endangered." Most cheetahs do not live on protected land. It is against the law to hunt or capture animals on protected land. Most of the big cats live in unprotected areas. These areas are risky for cheetahs. Farmers or hunters might try to kill them. Florian Weise studies cheetahs. He thinks the endangered label is important. It gets people to care more. He says the cheetah has been listed as vulnerable for a long time.  One type of cheetah almost went extinct. That's the Asiatic cheetah. As of August 2016, fewer than 40 Asiatic cheetahs remained in the wild. They live in protected parks in Iran. Iran is a country in West Asia. Iran is trying to protect its cheetahs. It put cheetahs on soccer jerseys. It also used famous people to talk about the cheetah. The International Union for the Conservation of Nature works to protect wildlife. It is also called the IUCN. The IUCN decides which animals are endangered. Weise hopes the IUCN will list the cheetah as endangered.  If the IUCN makes this choice, governments would have to make changes. They will have to follow rules to protect the cats. It could take many years. Either way, the new information about cheetahs is important. It gives people numbers to use when making decisions.  "It's a red flag there is a problem," Weise says.