Animals thriving in nuclear zone Tom Hinton had never heard the sound before. Wolf howls, long and loud, seemed to come from every direction in the darkness. Awe and fear crept down Hinton's spine. Most humans haven't experienced this in tens of thousands of years, he said. Humans have not lived in the remote area along the Belarus-Ukraine border for many years. They all left after a very different sound nearly 30 years earlier: the massive explosion of the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant in 1986. It killed dozens and drove more than 100,000 people from their homes. These days, abandoned apartment buildings are wrecks. Vines crawl up the crumbling walls of old farmhouses and break open skylights into their roofs. No one lives there. Not humans, that is. Wildlife populations — shaggy-haired wild boar, long-legged elk, howling wolves — are flourishing according to a study published this week in the journal Current Biology. It found that mammal numbers in the no man's land are as high, if not higher, than in even the most protected wildlife parks in Belarus. "What's surprising here was the life was able to increase even in an area that is among the most radioactively contaminated in the world," said Hinton. He studies how radiation affects plants and animals, and he co-authored the study. "It shows ... how much damage we do," said another co-author, Jim Smith. He is an environmental science professor at the University of Portsmouth. "Not that radiation isn't bad," he added, "but what people do when they're there is so much worse." The study is the first real count of wild animals in the exclusion zone. It is the area around the reactor where humans cannot live. Animal numbers were low when scientists first started counting them in 1987. But they rapidly rose once humans left the region. Brown bears and rare European lynx — cats the size of a Great Dane — quickly appeared in the forests, even though they hadn't been seen for decades before the accident. Wild boar began living in abandoned buildings. Trees grew in the villages' empty streets. Within 10 years, every animal population in the exclusion zone had at least doubled. At the same time, the same species were vanishing from other parts of the former Soviet Union. Their disappearance was likely caused by increased hunting, poorer wildlife management and other changes. By 2010, the last year of the census, the numbers of most animal species were as large as in any of Belarus' four national parks. For one species, the wolves, the population was seven times bigger. This shows researchers that long-term exposure to radiation has had no effect on the animal populations. This doesn't mean the zone isn't dangerous, Hinton stressed. While whole populations aren't dying out, individual animals might be getting sick. Also the soil in areas close to the nuclear reactor site is still poisonous. The presence of wolves is particularly important. They are a sign of the health of the entire ecosystem. If they're flourishing, that means that every other level of species, from elk and deer on down to insects and plants, must also be healthy. Another team of researchers is counting wildlife on the Ukrainian side of the exclusion zone, where no one is allowed to live. One of the scientists, Nick Beresford, praised the study and its findings. "People have said before that wildlife in the zone is flourishing," but there was no proof, he said. "This is the first study to really back it up with science." Walking around the exclusion zone is like being in "a national park without the people," Hinton said. Even the Soviet city of Pripyat in Ukraine, which once housed tens of thousands of workers at the Chernobyl plant, has been taken over by trees. "When I was there 15 years ago, it looked like a city with some trees growing in it," recalled Smith. "Now it looks like a forest with some buildings in it." For Hinton, it is both amazing and sobering. "It's an amazing experience from a wildlife perspective," he said. "It's sad to see the houses and the cars and the baseball bats, and you envision the life that people had to drop and leave. But you also see wild boar running around, and you don't see that as soon as you leave the zone."