Animals thriving in nuclear zone Tom Hinton had never heard the sound before. Wolf howls seemed to come from every direction in the dark. He felt awe and fear. Most people have not had this experience in tens of thousands of years, he said. Many people used to live and work in this area along the border of Belarus and Urkaine. Now, there are only empty, crumbling buildings and wild animals. Almost 30 years earlier, the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant exploded. It killed dozens of people. About 100,000 more left their homes. No one is allowed to live there even now because of dangerous levels of radiation from the explosion. Radiation is dangerous and can make people sick. Wildlife, on the other hand, are flourishing, says a new study. The study found that the number of animals is at least as great as it is in wildlife parks in Belarus. Hinton is surprised there are so many animals. He studies how radiation affects plants and animals. He helped write the paper. Animal numbers were low when scientists first started counting them in 1987. But they quickly rose once humans left the area. Brown bears and rare European lynx quickly appeared in the forests. They had not been seen for many years before the explosion. Wild boar began living in abandoned buildings. Trees grew in the empty streets of villages. "It shows ... how much damage we do," said another co-author, Jim Smith. He is an environmental scientist at the University of Portsmouth in England. "Not that radiation isn't bad," he added. "But what people do when they're there is so much worse." Within 10 years of the nuclear explosion, the number of animals at least doubled. At the same time, those kinds of animals were vanishing from other parts of the country. Their disappearance was probably caused by different reasons, such as hunting. By 2010, there were as many animals as in any of Belarus' national parks. The number of wolves was seven times bigger. This fact proved at least one thing to the scientists. The radiation had no effect on the number of animals. The zone is still dangerous, Hinton said. Although entire species of animals are not dying out, some animals might be getting sick. Also, the soil in areas close to the power plant is still poisonous. The wolves are very important. They are a sign that all the living things in the area are healthy. If the wolves are doing well, that means that every plant and animal must also be healthy. There is another team of researchers. They are counting wildlife on the Ukraine side of the border. One of the scientists is Nick Beresford. He praised the study. He said people have thought the animals were doing well. Still, there was no real proof. "This is the first study to really back it up with science," he said. Walking around the area is like being in "a national park without the people," Hinton said. Thousands of workers at the Chernobyl plant once lived in the city of Pripyat in Ukraine. Now it has been taken over by trees. "When I was there 15 years ago, it looked like a city with some trees growing in it," recalled Smith. "Now it looks like a forest with some buildings in it." Hinton said it is sad to see the houses and cars and baseball bats that people left behind. He said these objects help him imagine their lives. "But you also see wild boar running around," Hinton said. "You don't see that as soon as you leave the zone."