A recent study suggests a key element of communication might have been present 7 million to 13 million years ago in a common ancestor of chimpanzees and humans The building blocks of language may go back far longer than humans have walked the earth, a new study has found. In 2010, a band of chimpanzees was transferred from the Netherlands to join a group of chimps at Scotland’s Edinburgh Zoo. The two groups used different grunts to refer to apples. Three years later, they had developed a common sound for the fruit, according to the study published Thursday in the journal Current Biology. In other words, chimpanzees can learn a new sound for a common object, something researchers thought only humans can do. The discovery suggests something else important about language. A key element of communication may have been present 7 million to 13 million years ago in the last common ancestor of chimpanzees and humans. Research has shown that primates can produce unique calls for things or events in their environment. Chimpanzees can signal the arrival of a predator or discovery of a desirable food, for instance. Experiments have shown that other chimps can get important information from those calls, and act on it. “We don’t call them semantic signals like in human language – we call them functionally referential calls,” said study co-author Simon Townsend, a comparative biologist at the University of Zurich. “In animals there’s always been a feeling that you can’t really decouple these referential calls from the underlying emotional state that the animal is experiencing,” Townsend said. “In human language, there’s no link between the way that we’re feeling and the word and what it sounds like.” For that reason and others, most researchers had assumed that nonhuman primates were born knowing these calls, which never changed. In contrast, human speech is flexible and can be taught. “What we’ve demonstrated is that there is no difference, at least in chimpanzees,” Townsend said. Investigating whether one group of chimps might be able to adopt sounds from other bands of chimps has been difficult. Chimp groups don’t suddenly merge with other groups in the wild, and in fact, they’re far more likely to go to war with each other, research shows. So when seven chimpanzees from the Beekse Bergen Safari Park in the Netherlands were transferred to the Edinburgh Zoo, researchers took advantage. University of York evolutionary psychologist Katie Slocombe, the lead investigator of the study, had previously shown that chimpanzees changed their calls depending on how much they preferred a type of food. At the Edinburgh Zoo, she noticed the Dutch chimps clearly liked apples. Their calls had a higher pitch than their new Scottish zoo mates. The researchers recorded each group’s food grunts over the course of three years. For the first two years little changed. But the process of getting to know one another was slow too. Researchers had suspected that adapting each other's calls would be related to the chimps feeling more comfortable. By 2013, it became clear that the grunts the Dutch chimps associated with apples had come down in pitch and was closer to that of the Edinburgh chimps, according to the study. And by then, the chimps no longer were hanging out in cliques. The two groups had fully integrated, according to the study. The Netherlands chimps also did not appear to have changed their food likes and dislikes. They still were more inclined than the Scottish chimps to choose apples over other foods, according to the study. Other research has shown that primates and non-primates change their calls as circumstances change. However, this would be the first time anyone has documented that a species changed its calls because of other members of that species. What caused the change remains unknown. “There must be some sort of driving factor why they would need to do this when two chimp groups come together," Townsend said. It could be that the chimps wanted to be better understood, Townsend said. “But it could also be more likely that it’s some aspect of a social bonding function. If you sound more like the one you’re with, then you just have a better chance of making friends and having a place in the social group.” The researchers lean toward the latter explanation and think the chimpanzees were driven by the need to get along. Simon Kirby studies the evolution of language at the University of Edinburgh, but he was not involved in the study. He said it was “the first hint that at least the sounds of referentially meaningful calls may be socially learned in a primate species other than human.” An early language skill in a common ancestor could have helped contribute to the eventual development of language in humans. But University of Wisconsin psychologist Charles Snowdon disagreed. He said he suspected the study results do not show that chimpanzees learned a novel sound. Snowdon specializes in primate and human cognition and was not involved in the study. Cognition is the process of acquiring knowledge and understanding. “The slow pace of social integration reported suggests that these calls are really about affiliation and not about” language, Snowdon said. Besides, he noted, the calls were too similar in the first place. Snowdon gave an example. He said that if he learned that "gato" means "cat" in Spanish, then he has learned a new word for cat. "But if a Spanish speaker and I start saying 'gat' with each other, we are simply converging on a term.”