A new study finds that, over time, chimps adapt and converge their calls when they are regrouped with a different band of chimpanzees. In 2010, a band of chimpanzees was transferred from the Netherlands to a zoo in Scotland. Scientists paid close attention to what happened next. At first, the two groups of chimps used different grunts to refer to apples. Three years later, after the two groups had bonded, they had developed a common sound for the fruit. Before the study, scientists had thought that learning language from each other was something only humans could do. The study was published Thursday in the scientific journal Current Biology. The discovery suggests something else important about language. The building blocks of language may have come before humans came to be. A key element of communication may have been present 7 million to 13 million years ago in the last common ancestor of chimpanzees and humans. Research has shown that primates can produce unique calls for things or events. Chimpanzees will make one sound for a predator and another for food. Experiments have shown that other chimps can understand those calls, and act on them. Scientists didn't consider these calls true language, said study co-author Simon Townsend. He is a comparative biologist at the University of Zurich in Switzerland. Instead, they saw these calls as noises that communicate information. The scientists call them functionally referential calls. “In animals there’s always been a feeling that you can’t really decouple these referential calls from the underlying emotional state that the animal is experiencing,” Townsend said. “In human language, there’s no link between the way that we’re feeling and the word and what it sounds like.” For that reason and others, most researchers had assumed that nonhuman primates were born knowing these calls, which never changed. In contrast, human speech can change over time and be taught. “What we’ve demonstrated is that there is no difference, at least in chimpanzees,” Townsend said. Investigating whether chimps could learn calls from other chimp bands has been difficult. Chimp groups don’t suddenly join other groups in the wild. In fact, they’re far more likely to go to war with each other, research shows. In 2010, seven chimpanzees from the Beekse Bergen Safari Park in the Netherlands were transferred to the Edinburgh Zoo. Researchers decided to see what would happen when the two bands were brought together. University of York evolutionary psychologist Katie Slocombe noticed the Dutch chimps clearly liked apples. Their calls had a higher pitch than their new Edinburgh zoo mates. Slocombe was the lead investigator of the study, The researchers recorded each group’s food grunts over the course of three years. For the first two years, not much changed. But the two groups were slow to warm up to each other. Researchers had suspected that using each other's calls meant they were just feeling more comfortable. By 2013, it became clear that the grunts the Dutch chimps made for apples had come down in pitch. They sounded more like the Scottish chimps, according to the study. And by then, the chimps no longer kept to themselves. The two groups were socializing, according to the study. Other research has shown that primates and non-primates change their calls. However, this would be the first time anyone has shown that an animal learned a call from another animal. Scientists think there has to be a reason the chimps changed their call, but don't know why. It could be that the chimps wanted to be better understood, Townsend said. “But it could also be more likely that it’s some aspect of a social bonding," he said. "If you sound more like the one you’re with, then you just have a better chance of making friends and having a place in the social group.” The researchers think the chimpanzees were driven by the need to get along. University of Edinburgh Professor Simon Kirby called it “the first hint" that communication can be socially learned by primates other than humans. The skill must have been present in a common ancestor, he said. But University of Wisconsin psychologist Charles Snowdon disagreed. He said he doesn't think chimpanzees really learned a new sound. Snowdon pointed out that the two chimp groups took a long time to warm up. For him, that suggests the calls were more about becoming more connected, not language. Besides, he noted, the calls were too similar in the first place. Snowdon gave an example. He said that if he learned that "gato" means cat in Spanish, then he has learned a new word for cat. However, if a Spanish speaker and he start saying "gat" with each other, they are simply agreeing on what they should call a cat.