New research study shows close social bonds help chimps reduce stress levels Having a best friend makes us feel good. It can be good for our health, too. Scientists found this is true for people. It is also true for chimpanzees. Scientists studied chimps in the forests of Uganda. They saw spending time with friends lowers levels of a certain chemical. Both chimps and people make this chemical when they are stressed. They are called stress hormones. They help the body work better for a short time when the body feels it is in danger. There can be problems if the chemicals are released too often. The study was described this week in a science journal. Scientists say that stress can make us sick. The stress hormones the body makes cause illnesses. Having friends helps many animals deal with stress. That goes for people, too. Friendships keep people healthier. Scientists do not know exactly how, though.  A team of scientists studied the Sonso chimpanzees in Uganda’s Budongo Forest. The scientists were from all over the world. They studied 50 adult chimps. There were also 28 younger chimps. The research was done from February 2008 to July 2010. Some people have one or two close friends. Other people have more. It is the same way with chimpanzees. The scientists wanted to see if spending time with their friends while doing usual things led to less stress. The scientists watched the chimps doing three things. They watched them resting. They watched them cleaning themselves. They also watched them fighting with other groups of chimps. The scientists followed the chimps around. They collected pee samples from 17 of the chimps. They wanted to see how much stress hormone was in the pee. The scientists got the chimpanzee pee in two ways. They tied plastic bags over a forked stick on the ground. The bags were under where a chimp sat high in a tree. The bag caught the pee. Scientists also got pee off of leaves on the ground. They tested the pee. There was less stress hormone in the pee if the chimps had been with friends. And yes, the scientists sometimes got splashed with pee.