A group of chimpanzees that merged with another group eventually changed the pitch of its call for apples to sound more like the other group. In 2010, a group of chimpanzees was transferred from the Netherlands to a zoo in Scotland. Scientists paid attention to what happened next. At first, the two groups of chimps used different sounds for apples. Three years later, they had developed a common sound to stand for the fruit. Before, scientists thought learning language from each other was something only humans could do. Now, they know that chimps can do it too. The scientists published their discovery Thursday. Their discovery suggests something else important about language. The building blocks of language may predate humans. It may have been present 7 million to 13 million years ago in the last ancestor of chimpanzees and humans. Research has shown that primates use different calls for things or events. Chimpanzees make one sound for a predator and another for food. Experiments have shown that other chimps understand those calls and act on them. Scientists did not consider this to be real language, said study co-author Simon Townsend. He teaches at the University of Zurich in Switzerland. Instead, scientists thought these calls were just noises that communicate information. For that reason, most researchers thought that apes were born knowing these calls. Also, they thought new calls could not be invented. In comparison, human speech changes over time and can be taught. "There is no difference, at least in chimpanzees,” Townsend said. It is hard for scientists to figure out whether chimps can learn calls from other chimp groups. Chimp groups do not suddenly join other groups in the wild. In fact, they’re far more likely to go to war. Then, the scientists got their chance. In 2010, seven chimpanzees left the Beekse Bergen Safari Park in the Netherlands. They were transferred to the Edinburgh Zoo in Scotland. Katie Slocombe is a scientist from the University of York in England. She noticed the Dutch chimps clearly liked apples. Their calls were different than the Scottish chimps. Slocombe was the lead scientist of the study. The researchers recorded each group’s food grunts for three years. For the first two years, not much changed. But the process of the chimp groups getting to know one another was slow too. Researchers had suspected that using each other's calls meant they were more comfortable with each other. By 2013, it became clear the grunts the Dutch chimps made for apples had changed. They sounded more like the Scottish chimps. By then, the chimps were hanging out together. Research has shown that animals can change their calls. However, this is the first time anyone has shown that an animal learned a new call from another animal. Scientists do not know the reason why. The chimps might want to be better understood, Townsend said — or they might just be trying to make friends. "If you sound more like the one you’re with," Townsend said, "then you just have a better chance of making friends." Simon Kirby is at the University of Edinburgh. He called it “the first hint" that language can be learned by apes. But University of Wisconsin psychologist Charles Snowdon disagreed. He said the chimpanzees did not really learn a new sound. Snowdon pointed out that the chimps took time to warm up. The calls were about becoming part of a group, he said. It was not about language.