New research study shows close social bonds help chimps reduce stress levels We all know having a best friend helps us. It can even help us have better health. It turns out this is true whether you’re a human or a chimpanzee. A new study followed a chimpanzee community in the forests of Uganda. It found that quality time with close friends greatly reduced levels of a stress hormone in primates. Stress hormones are chemicals the body makes to help it work better when there is danger. Primates are a group of mammals that include human beings, apes, and monkeys. The study was described this week in a science journal. Scientists have known for a long time that stress, or fear and worry, can hurt our health. Stress hormones don't hurt a body if they are released once in a while. Becoming stressed too often can cause health problems, though. Stress raises the risk of early death in humans. It does the same thing in other mammals that live in groups. Close social connections can help these animals deal with stress. This includes humans. Friendships seem to lower the risk of getting some illnesses. Scientists have not yet figured out exactly how they do this, though.  To find out, the team of scientists studied members of the Sonso chimpanzee community in Uganda’s Budongo Forest. The scientists came from all over the world. The chimpanzee group had 15 male adults and 35 female adults. There were also 28 younger or infant chimps. The study was done from February 2008 to July 2010. Like humans, chimpanzees tend to have best friends, or bond partners they feel close to. Some humans have one or two close friends. Other people have more. Similarly, the number of bond partners was different for each chimp. The scientists wanted to see whether spending time with these bond partners led to having less stress during particularly stressful situations, or whether time with friends helped lower stress levels throughout the day.  The scientists observed the chimps perform three types of activities. These were resting, cleaning themselves, or having small fights with other groups of chimps. Sometimes they watched the chimps having real fights with competing groups. Sometimes the scientists tricked the chimpanzees into thinking other chimps were challenging them. The scientists banged on the large supporting roots of nearby trees. At first, the chimps thought another group of chimps was doing that. This made them think they had to defend themselves.   The scientists watched the chimps and followed them around. They collected urine, or pee, samples from nine adult male and eight adult female chimps. The scientists collected the urine samples to see how much of the stress hormone cortisol the urine contained. Cortisol is a chemical made in the adrenal glands, near the kidneys. When cortisol is released, it tells the body's cells to make sugar. This sugar is extra fuel for the brain to use in an emergency. The body must work more efficiently when it is in danger. Getting the urine samples was not easy. Scientists had to follow each chimp for six hours after they were seen doing one of the three activities. It meant the scientists had to touch the animals' pee. Scientists got the urine in two ways, said the writers of the study. Plastic bags were tied over a forked stick on the ground and held underneath where a chimp was sitting high in a tree. The bag caught the urine as it fell down. Scientists also got urine off of leaves on the ground if the chimp had just urinated there. Then urine samples were stored in a thermos flask with ice. They froze the samples when they got back to camp. And yes, in case you were wondering, the observers sometimes got splashed with urine.