New research study shows close social bonds help chimps reduce stress levels We all know a little support from our friends helps in life. It turns out this is true whether you’re a human or a chimp. A new study followed a chimpanzee community in the forests of Uganda. It found that quality time with close companions significantly decreased stress hormone levels in the primates. The findings of the study were described this week in the science journal, Nature Communications. They shed light on the physiological, or physical health effects of close companionship in chimps. The findings could have implications for humans' health, too. Researchers have long known that stress or anxiety can hurt our health. Stress hormones are chemicals the body makes to help it work more effectively when in danger. They're not a problem if released occasionally. But if stress hormones are released too often, they can cause health problems. Stress raises the risk of early death in humans as well as other social mammals. “It can have effects on immune function, cardio function, fertility, cognition, even your mood,” said study coauthor Kevin Langergraber. Langergraber is a primatologist at Arizona State University. He studies primates, a group of mammals which include human beings, apes, and monkeys.  Maintaining close social bonds can help these animals cope with stress. Those animals include humans. Friendships can potentially lessen some health risks. But scientists have yet to pin down the exact physiological machinery at work. “Social bonds make you survive and produce better — but how do they do that?” Langergraber said. To find out, the international team of researchers studied members of the Sonso chimpanzee community in Uganda’s Budongo Forest. The group consisted of 15 males, 35 females and 28 younger or infant chimps. The study was conducted from February 2008 to July 2010. Like humans, chimpanzees tend to have best friends, or bond partners with whom they feel close. Humans might have one or two close friends and others have more. Similarly, the number of bond partners varied for each chimp. The researchers wanted to see whether spending time with these bond partners led to lower stress levels during particularly stressful situations, or whether time spent with friends helped lower stress levels more generally, throughout the day. The scientists observed the chimps perform three types of activities: resting, cleaning themselves, or having small fights with other groups of chimps. Sometimes these fights were actual encounters with rival groups. Sometimes the researchers tricked the chimpanzees into thinking other chimps were challenging them. The researchers banged on the large supporting roots of nearby trees, causing the chimps to react aggressively.  A team of up to six observers watched the chimps and followed them around to collect urine samples. The samples, collected from nine adult male and eight adult female chimps, were tested to see how much of the stress hormone cortisol they contained. Cortisol is made in the adrenal glands, near the kidneys. When it is released, cells make glucose from proteins and fatty acids. This glucose is extra fuel for the brain to use in an emergency when it needs to work more efficiently.    Getting the urine samples was not easy. Researchers had to follow each chimp for six hours after observing them doing one of the three activities. While recording every change in the chimps' behavior, researchers had to get up close and personal with the animals’ bodily fluids. “Urine was either pipetted from plastic bags, after the bags were tied over a forked stick and held in the urine stream when subjects were sitting in a tree, or from leaf matter when urination occurred on the ground after subjects had moved away,” the study authors wrote.  Then urine samples were stored in a thermos flask with ice. They were frozen in liquid nitrogen upon arrival in camp. That had to be done within 10 hours after collection. And yes, in case you were wondering, the observers did sometimes get splashed with the urine. The scientists found that chimpanzees’ levels of urinary cortisol, were 23 percent lower, on average, during the activities when they were with their bond partner. Levels of four types of metabolites or molecules from metabolizing cortisol were lower, too. This was especially true for stressful activities, such as the intergroup rivalries. In those situations any chimp might face physical harm or even death. The findings fit together well with earlier research showing that levels of oxytocin rise during grooming, Langergraber said. Oxytocin has been called the “cuddle hormone.” It is released when people snuggle up to each other, or bond as friends.  “It might be indicating that oxytocin might have a dampening role in cortisol secretions … so it’s giving you some more knowledge about the complicated ways in which these hormones interact,” he said. The findings in chimpanzees, some of our closest living relatives, could shed light on the role such close social relationships play in human health too, he said. Such friendships may be just as important during good times as bad — though more research needs to be done before any conclusions can be drawn.