It's like a lapdog, but it's a pig. A Chinese biotech company has edited porcine genes so these pigs will not get too big. Available only in China, each tiny pig carries a hefty price tag of $1,600. BEIJING, China — Baby pigs can make cute pets. The problem is that they do not stay small forever. When they grow up, they can be as big as a bathtub. A Chinese company says it now has the answer. It has made a mini pig. The mini pig weighs about 33 pounds. An adult pig can weigh hundreds of pounds. The company is called BGI. It made the tiny pig by changing its DNA. The method is called gene-editing. DNA are the instructions for life. It tells your body how to grow and work. Pigs have DNA too. DNA is passed from parents to their children. DNA is made up of genes. Genes control how big people and animals will grow. They also control eye color. BGI will start selling the mini pigs for $1,600. The company did not set out to make pets. It wanted to make smaller animals to study human diseases. Several music and movie stars have pet pigs. Miley Cyrus’ pig is named Bubba Sue. It grew so big she can hardly lift it. Some people abandon pet pigs that grow too large. Experts say that more people would keep their pigs if they were smaller. Curt Mills is with the Southern California Association for Miniature Pot-Bellied Pigs. He says four California animal shelters are filled with pet pigs. About 150 of them are looking for homes. “Pigs are good pets," said Patty Morrisroe. She raises pet pigs in Oregon. She said the problem is that they can grow too large. Alison Van Eenennaam is an expert at the University of California. She visited BGI about three months ago. She saw the micro pigs. Gene editing is a powerful tool, Van Eenennaam said. It can make animals that stay healthy. People are also happy to have them as pets. A fish, called GloFish, has been popular in the United States. It lights up. Scientists in Singapore made them. They inserted jellyfish and sea anemone genes into zebrafish eggs. Yet, many people do not want to eat animals that were changed. No genetically changed animal can be used for food. No country allows it. BGI did not just make smaller pigs. The company figured out how to do something else. It can change the pigs' colors.