China's rising number of animal lovers had to contend with a dog meat festival; a stranded dolphin that died; and a bear paw smuggling case. Still, they're optimistic. BEIJING - For animal lovers in China, the week seemed to keep getting worse. First, tourists in a southern resort reportedly picked up a stranded dolphin and took photos with it instead of immediately calling for help. The mammal later died. Then, border police announced they had caught two men trying to smuggle more than 200 bear paws into the country from Russia. The feet are considered delicious in some parts of China. On Friday, the southern city of Yulin went ahead with a dog meat festival in spite of protests. Many activists complained that the table-bound pups were stolen strays and pets. All three episodes got a lot of attention, both on news websites and on Weibo, which is like Twitter in China. Protesters even held a pro-dog rally Thursday in Beijing, with people dressed in colorful animal costumes dancing in a plaza to support the Yulin canines. The strong reactions showed a growing concern for animal welfare among the Chinese population. This cheered animal activists. But at least in the case of the dog meat festival, the reactions also brought up tensions with people who say new attitudes are threatening some cultural traditions. "Thousands of dogs will be eaten at a dog meat festival in Yulin," wrote one Weibo user, Yu Jichun. "As long as such a festival still exists in China, this country can't start talk about becoming civilized." Some people disagreed. There is a long history of eating dog meat with lychee fruit at the start of summer. People in Yulin say it is good for health. Xie Pingxiang, a local historian, said that eating dog meat is traditional. "It doesn't break the law and has nothing to do with morality either," he said. Grace Gabriel doesn't agree. She works at the International Fund for Animal Welfare. People in China have begun to use social media to protest incidents of perceived animal cruelty much more than ever before. "The online response has been terrific," she said. "In the past, this kind of outrage usually came from supporters overseas. But now momentum is growing inside China." More than 100,000 people had signed an online petition against the festivals, Gabriel pointed out. Several cities have abandoned such events in recent years. Those festivals have brought too much criticism to the cities. "I was kind of surprised that Yulin went ahead this year," she said. "As more and more people keep dogs as pets, more and more people are against slaughtering them for meat." Still, China needs to improve its legal protections for animals, Gabriel said. The country lacks laws to keep "companion animals" such as dogs and cats safe from abuse or death. "There is no law to protect them," she said. Song Jinzhang said he traveled to Yulin earlier this week to look into preparations for the dog meat festival. Government inspectors came with activists from his group on a mission to shut down an illegal dog-slaughtering facility, he said, adding that 48 dogs were saved. The government has stopped issuing new licenses for such facilities, he said. They won't give out any more in the future, either. But the key is "to try to convince people not to eat dog meat." Song said that will reduce demand. Some observers said the efforts to put down the dog meat festival might backfire. "It might be just a small group of people who are eating dog meat," wrote one user on Weibo. "But the whole thing has become a huge promotion for a local dog meat industry in Yulin. Many people who never ate dog meat before might want to come to Yulin to give it a try now." Many people argued about the dog meat festival. But reaction to the dolphin incident was much more unified. "Taking a stranded dolphin out of the water for a photoshoot is not just ignorant, it also shows no empathy toward life," wrote one Weibo commentator. Another one said: "A dolphin is a type of kind and smart animal that everyone loves. Hope the 'tourist incident' in Hainan would not happen again. RIP to the little dolphin. Let's commemorate this lost life." Early reports blamed tourists for interfering with the rescue of the marine mammal. But the local government newspaper later reported otherwise. It said the men lifting the animal out of the water were actually lifeguards trying to save it. One lifeguard did admit that he and his fellow rescuers took photos, however. Authorities said the animal died partly because there was no marine wildlife rescue center nearby. Specialists had to come from Haikou, a four-hour drive, to the beach in Sanya where the dolphin was found. "We are not professional wildlife rescuers," one of the lifeguards told the paper. He said that he felt mistreated by the media attention. "What we can do is to try to protect the dolphin, and prevent tourists from getting close to it, and wait for the professional rescuers to come."