It's home on the expanded mountain range for China's giant pandas. China is the home to one of the world's most loved animals: the giant panda. Currently, most pandas live in a handful of zoos and parks. Now, China is planning to build a huge reserve for their giant pandas.  A reserve is a special park that gives animals a safe place to live. The new reserve will be giant. It will take up more than 10,000 square miles. That is about three times as big as Yellowstone National Park, one of the largest parks in the United States. China hopes that having this much safe space will help to boost the population of wild pandas. The animal has been endangered for a long time. There are so few pandas left, there is a chance that they could disappear if they are not protected. The plan is to link up 67 existing panda reserves on six isolated mountain ranges. It is hoped that by doing this, it will help the pandas mingle and mate. The giant panda has been doing somewhat better in recent years. The numbers of giant pandas rose 17 percent between 2003 and 2013\. Last year, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (ICUN) said the panda was no longer “endangered.” The animal is now considered to be “vulnerable.” This is good news, but the danger of extinction still exists, although it is not as immediate. About 1,864 pandas live in the wild. Their main threat is the loss of their habitat. The land on which they live and depend is disappearing. China wants to increase the number of giant pandas to 2,000 by 2025. In addition to the giant panda, the national park will help to protect 8,000 other endangered animals and plants. Hou Rong is the director of the Chengdu Research Base for Giant Panda Breeding. “Many scientists and conservation experts support the building of a national park,” she said. The giant panda population has increased recently for a number of reasons. These include successful breeding, the reintroduction of pandas to the wild and opening of national parks. The ICUN has warned that the gains could be reversed by climate change, though. The Earth's climate continues to heat up. The warming is predicted to wipe out more than one-third of the panda’s habitat over the next 80 years. The new reserve will join eight other national parks aimed at protecting endangered species. It will also protect the land lying at the main points of major rivers, such as the Yellow and Yangtse. About 200 pandas live under human care. There has been some success in increasing the number in zoos. Last year, 64 cubs were born, according to the State Forestry Administration. Fifty-four of those cubs survived in nature reserves and zoos. In 2003, the China Conservation and Research Center for the Giant Panda started the reintroduction program. It has helped seven pandas move to the wild, but only five survived.  “Past experience has told us how much a national park can do for a country’s environment and ecology," said David Wildt. He is a senior scientist from the Smithsonian. “I am delighted to see China’s breakthrough in panda breeding and reintroduction programs. But it’s time to test if these measures work out in the new system of national parks,” Wildt said. The proposal might be less popular among the 170,000 people that live nearby. They will have to be moved to make way for the park. Although many families have lived in these areas for generations, officials think they might endanger the pandas if they stay. Hou tried to make the move better for the families. She said they would be offered new homes in other areas. She also said that some of the people being moved might be able to find jobs at the new park. Forced relocation is a major problem in China. The nation has grown very quickly. Construction projects have forced millions of people out of the country to make way for roads, factories and big apartment buildings.