It's home on the expanded mountain range for China's giant pandas. China is planning to create a giant panda reserve that will be three times the size of Yellowstone National Park in the United States. The new project is part of the country's efforts to boost the wild population of the long-endangered giant panda. The 10,476-square-mile area will link up 67 existing panda reserves on six isolated mountain ranges. It is hoped that this mountain “merger” will help the pandas mingle and mate. This level of breeding would enrich the gene pool, China's state news agency Xinhua reported. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (ICUN) reclassified the giant panda last year from endangered to vulnerable. In other words, the future of the giant panda is more certain now than it was before. The numbers of giant pandas rose 17 percent between 2003 and 2013. About 1,864 pandas live in the wild, where their main threat is loss of habitat. China wants to increase the number to 2,000 by 2025. ## Panda Protection Will Benefit Other Animals In addition to the giant panda, the national park will help to protect 8,000 endangered animals and plants, Xinhua said. It will also ensure that one authority is responsible for protecting pandas across the Gansu, Shaanxi and Sichuan provinces in south-central China, which the park straddles. At the moment, the animals fall under the responsibility of different local governments when they cross boundaries. “It will be a haven for biodiversity and provide protection for the whole ecological system,” said Hou Rong. She is the director of the Chengdu Research Base for Giant Panda Breeding in Sichuan province. “Many scientists and conservation experts support the building of a national park,” she added. ## Giant Panda Numbers Are Growing The giant panda population has increased recently for a number of reasons. These include effective breeding, the reintroduction of pandas to the wild, and opening of national parks. However, the ICUN has warned that the gains could be reversed by climate change. It is predicted that global warming will wipe out more than one-third of panda habitat over the next 80 years. The new reserve will join eight other national parks aimed at protecting endangered species. It will also protect the ecology of the land lying at the headwaters of major rivers, such as the Yellow and Yangtse. Around 200 pandas live under human care, and there has been some success in increasing the number in zoos. However, there have been concerns about inbreeding. It can create health and development problems when animals can only mate within a small community. Last year, 64 cubs were born, according to the State Forestry Administration. Only 54 of those cubs survived in nature reserves and zoos. ## Scientists Are Cautiously Enthusiastic In 2003, the China Conservation and Research Center for the Giant Panda started the reintroduction program. It has led to seven pandas being moved to the wild. “Past experience has told us how much a national park can do for a country’s environment and ecology," David Wildt, a senior scientist from the Smithsonian, said. “I am delighted to see China’s breakthrough in panda breeding and reintroduction programs. But it’s time to test if these measures work out in the new system of national parks,” he added. ## Many People Will Have To Relocate The proposal might be less popular among the 170,000 people living in Sichan. Xinhua says that they will have to be moved to make way for the park. Although many families have lived in these areas for generations, officials determined that they posed a threat by bamboo harvesting and livestock grazing and therefore had to relocate. Hou attempted to cushion the blow to residents. She said they would be offered new homes in other areas. She also said that people relocating could possibly find jobs at the new park. Forced relocation is a major issue in China. The country has developed extremely quickly in recent years. Construction projects have forced millions of people off of rural land to make way for roads, factories and high-rise apartment buildings. The 2008 Beijing Olympics alone was blamed for 2 million people being forced to move to make way for infrastructure.