It's home on the expanded mountain range for China's giant pandas. China is planning to create a giant panda reserve three times the size of the United States' Yellowstone National Park. The new project is part of the country's efforts to boost the wild population of the long-endangered giant panda. The 10,476-square-mile area will link up 67 existing panda reserves on six isolated mountain ranges. It is hoped that this “merger” will help the pandas to mingle and mate. This level of breeding would enrich the gene pool, China's state news agency Xinhua reported. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (ICUN) reclassified the giant panda last year from endangered to vulnerable. In other words, the future of the giant panda is more certain now than it was before. The numbers of giant pandas rose 17 percent between 2003 and 2013. An estimated 1,864 pandas live in the wild, where their main threat is habitat loss. China wants to increase the number to 2,000 by 2025. In addition to the giant panda, the national park will help to protect 8,000 other endangered animals and plants, Xinhua said. It will also ensure one authority is responsible for protecting pandas across the Gansu, Shaanxi and Sichuan provinces in south-central China, which the park straddles. At the moment, the animals fall under the responsibility of different local governments when they cross boundaries. “It will be a haven for biodiversity and provide protection for the whole ecological system,” said Hou Rong. She is the director of the Chengdu Research Base for Giant Panda Breeding in Sichuan province. “Many scientists and conservation experts support the building of a national park,” she added. The giant panda population has increased recently through a combination of breeding, the reintroduction of animals to the wild and creation of national parks. But the ICUN has warned that the gains could be reversed by climate change. Global warming is predicted to wipe out more than one-third of the animal’s habitat over the next 80 years. The new reserve will join eight other national parks aimed at protecting endangered species. It will also protect the ecology of the land lying at the headwaters of major rivers, such as the Yellow and Yangtse. Some 200 pandas live in captivity and there has been some success in increasing the number in zoos, but there have been concerns about inbreeding. Last year, 64 cubs were born and 54 survived in nature reserves and zoos, according to the State Forestry Administration. In 2003, the China Conservation and Research Center for the Giant Panda started the reintroduction program, which has led to seven being moved to the wild, although two have since died. “Past experience has told us how much a national park can do for a country’s environment and ecology," David Wildt, a senior scientist from the Smithsonian, said. “I am delighted to see China’s breakthrough in panda breeding and reintroduction programs. But it’s time to test if these measures work out in the new system of national parks.” The proposal might be less popular among the 170,000 people living in Sichuan that Xinhua says will have to be moved to accommodate the park. Although many families have lived in these areas for generations, officials determined that they posed a threat by bamboo harvesting and livestock grazing and therefore had to relocate. Hou, who said he first suggested the idea in 2014, attempted to cushion the blow to residents by saying they would be offered new homes and could potentially work at the new park. Forced removals are a sensitive topic in China, where decades of rapid urbanization have forced millions of people from rural land to make way for roads, factories and high-rise apartment blocks. The 2008 Beijing Olympics alone was blamed for the forced evacuation of 2 million people to make way for infrastructure.