A dog meat festival went on despite protests; a stranded dolphin died, and a bear paw smuggling case came to light. Still, things are looking up for animal welfare in China. BEIJING - For animal lovers in China, the week kept getting worse. First, tourists in a southern resort reportedly picked up a stranded dolphin. They took photos with it instead of immediately calling for help. It later died. Then, border police announced they had caught two men trying to sneak more than 200 bear paws into the country. The feet are considered delicious in some parts of China. And on Friday, the southern city of Yulin held a dog meat festival. They put it on in spite of protests. Many activists complained that the dogs that were to be eaten were stolen strays and pets. All three episodes got a lot of attention, both on news websites and on China's version of Twitter Weibo. Protesters even held a pro-pup rally Thursday in Beijing. People dressed in colorful animal costumes danced in a park to support the Yulin dogs. The strong reactions showed Chinese people's growing concern for animals. This cheered animal activists. But the reactions also caused problems. Some say new ideas are threatening the ways people have celebrated in China for years. "Thousands of dogs will be eaten at a dog meat festival in Yulin," wrote one Weibo user, Yu Jichun. "As long as such a festival still exists in China, this country can't start talk about becoming civilized." Some people disagreed. There is a long history of eating dog meat with fruit at the start of summer. People in Yulin say it is good for health. Xie Pingxiang, a local historian, said that eating dog meat goes way back. "It doesn't break the law and has nothing to do with morality either," he said. Grace Gabriel works at the International Fund for Animal Welfare, and she disagrees. People in China have begun to use social media to protest when they think animals are being treated cruelly. "The online response has been terrific," she said. "In the past, this kind of outrage usually came from supporters overseas. But now momentum is growing inside China." Several cities have abandoned such events in recent years. The festivals have brought them too much bad publicity. "I was kind of surprised that Yulin went ahead this year," she said. "As more and more people keep dogs as pets, more and more people are against slaughtering them for meat." Still, China needs to improve its protections for animals. The country lacks laws to keep "companion animals" such as dogs and cats safe from abuse or death, Gabriel said. Song Jinzhang traveled to Yulin earlier this week to look at how the people there got ready for the dog meat festival. Government inspectors came with him. They shut down an illegal dog-slaughtering facility and 48 dogs were saved. The government has stopped giving new licenses to such facilities, Song said. But the key is "to try to convince people not to eat dog meat." That will lower demand, he said. Some people said the efforts to put down the dog-meat festival might backfire. "It might be just a small group of people who are eating dog meat," wrote one user on Weibo. "But the whole thing has become a huge promotion for the local dog meat industry in Yulin. Many people who never ate dog meat before might want to come to Yulin to give it a try now." People took sides on the dog meat festival. There was much more agreement about the dolphin. Pulling a dolphin out of the water to take pictures was an unpopular idea. One Weibo user said: "A dolphin is a type of kind and smart animal that everyone loves. ... RIP to the little dolphin." Early stories blamed tourists for interfering with the rescue of the marine mammal. But the local government newspaper reported that the men lifting the animal out of the water were actually lifeguards trying to save it. One lifeguard did admit that he and the other lifeguards took photos, however. Officials said the animal died partly because there was no rescue center nearby. Special doctors had to come from Haikou to the beach in Sanya where the dolphin was found. That's a four-hour drive. "We are not professional wildlife rescuers," a lifeguard told the paper. He said that he felt like the media didn't tell his story well. "What we can do is to try to protect the dolphin, and prevent tourists from getting close to it, and wait for the professional rescuers to come."