A dead dolphin, a bear paw smuggling case, and a dog meat festival got a lot of attention. Still, animal lovers in China pointed to a rising concern for animal welfare and remained optimistic. BEIJING - The week seemed to bring only bad news for animal lovers in China. First, tourists in a southern resort picked up a stranded dolphin. They took photos with the animal instead of immediately calling for help. The dolphin later died. Next, police said they had caught two men trying to sneak more than 200 bear paws into the country. The feet are considered delicious in some parts of China. Then on Friday, the southern city of Yulin held a dog meat festival. People protested, but the city went ahead with the event. Many activists complained that the dogs were stolen strays and pets. The stories got a lot of attention. Protesters even held a pro-pup rally in Beijing. People dressed in colorful animal costumes danced in a park to support the Yulin dogs. The strong reactions showed Chinese people care more and more about animals. The protests cheered animal supporters. But not everyone was glad to see those protests. Some people say new ideas are threatening the way people have done things for many years. One Weibo user complained. "As long as such a festival still exists in China, this country can't start talk about becoming civilized," he said. Weibo is China's version of Twitter. Others disagreed. People in Yulin say dog meat is healthy. A local historian said that people have eaten dog meat for a long time. "It doesn't break the law" and does not have anything to do with being a good or bad person, he said. Grace Gabriel doesn't think so. She works at a center to protect animals. Several cities have given up the dog meat events in recent years. The festivals brought them too much bad publicity. "I was kind of surprised that Yulin went ahead this year," she said. Lots of people keep dogs as pets. That means more people are against killing them for meat, she said. Still, China has to protect animals better, she explained. The country needs laws to keep "companion animals" such as dogs and cats safe, Gabriel said. Song Jinzhang said he traveled to Yulin and looked at how the people there got ready for the dog meat festival. Government inspectors came with him. They shut down an illegal dog-butchering plant. Forty-eight dogs were saved. The government has stopped giving new licenses to such places, he said. But the key is "to try to convince people not to eat dog meat." That will lower demand, he said. Some animal lovers disagreed with the protests. They said putting down the dog meat festival might just be getting it more attention. "Many people who never ate dog meat before might want to come to Yulin to give it a try now," wrote one user on Weibo. Many people argued about the dog meat festival. But people mostly agreed about the dolphin story. People didn't like the idea of taking a dolphin out of the water for a picture. One Weibo user said: "A dolphin is a type of kind and smart animal that everyone loves. ... RIP to the little dolphin." Early stories blamed tourists for keeping scientists from saving the dolphin. But the local government newspaper reported that the men lifting the animal out of the water were actually lifeguards trying to help. One lifeguard did admit that he and his fellow rescuers took photos. Officials said the animal died partly because there was no rescue center nearby. Special doctors had to drive four hours from Haikou to the beach in Sanya where the dolphin was found. "We are not professional wildlife rescuers," a lifeguard told the paper. He said that the early news reports didn't tell his story well. "What we can do is to try to protect the dolphin, and prevent tourists from getting close to it, and wait for the professional rescuers to come."