Oh rats! New Yorkers are filing a record number of complaints about the pesky rodents. Experts say the rat population is steady, but complaints are surging thanks to a handy new app. NEW YORK, N.Y. — To many people in New York City, the rats are winning the war. The city's complaint hotline is headed for a record year of calls about rats. In each of the last two years, more than 24,000 people have complained about the animals. This year, the number could go even higher. One city official calls it a "rat crisis." Even world-weary New Yorkers were both disgusted and a little impressed by "Pizza Rat." He - or she - is the rat seen in a recent viral YouTube clip dragging a large cheese slice down a subway stairwell. Nora Prentice lives in Manhattan's Upper West Side neighborhood. She has repeatedly complained to the city about a colony of about 200 rats in a neighborhood park. "They're just sitting there in a lawn chair waiting for you," she said. "I don't know what the city can do about this rat condominium. It's really gross." Prentice said that she avoids the area because of the rats. She said the complaints she filed with the city were ignored after officials told her they were "working on the problem." One person who is sympathetic to the complaints is the city comptroller, Scott Stringer. He looks after the city's money. He also calls himself the "rat czar," because he's decided it is also his job to go after the rats. Stringer says the city's health department does not respond quickly enough to rat complaints. He also says the subway does not clean stations often enough, and this allows rats to live and multiply. "I've seen rats walking upright, saying, 'Good morning, Mr. Comptroller," he joked. New York officials who have been fighting rats for many years have a different explanation for the problem. They say the rising number of complaints does not mean there are more rats. They say the rat population has actually been holding steady the past few years. A Columbia University graduate student who studied the issue last year estimated there were 2 million rats in New York City. Many people who live here think the number is more like 8 million. Scientists and city officials, however, say it's impossible to accurately estimate the number. "There's no way to do that," said Caroline Bragdon, a scientist with the city's health department and a rat expert. She said scientists can estimate the number of rats in a small area like a park, but larger estimates are not accurate. Bragdon believes two things are responsible for the rise in complaints about rats. One is that garbage was left to rot on sidewalks during last winter's large snowfall. The other is that filing a complaint is easier now with the city's 311 complaint line smartphone app. Bragdon and her team respond to the complaints. They have created a citywide "rat index" and inspect dozens of buildings each month. What started as a team of less than a dozen people has now expanded to nearly 50. They are given about $3 million a year to help control rats. New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio is also trying to fix the problem. His plan goes after communities with the highest number of rat complaints. It seeks to destroy the rats' habitats and sources of food. Every little bit helps, Bragdon said. Unlike the famously hungry Pizza Rat, she says, most rats need only about an ounce of food and water daily to survive. "It's an apple core, it's a piece of a hotdog, a couple of chips. It's the crumbs," she said. "You'd much rather prevent rats from being here than treat them with poison after they're here." Not all of the new tactics have worked out. One report said the plan to rid the subway of rats was not successful. "There are a lot of rats, especially at night," subway rider Yessenia Alvarez said. "When they come out, it's like they're everywhere." City health inspectors regularly search the city. They are looking for signs that many people would never notice, like tiny mounds of dirt that lead to an underground rat burrow or streaks on walls left by greasy fur. "Here's a big burrow, and it's fresh," Bragdon said during a recent inspection of a small park in Manhattan's Chinatown neighborhood. The area is well-known for its rat problem. As she pointed to the hole, a furry little head popped out, revealing one of the newest generation of New York City rats. Bragdon greeted it: "Hi, mister."