Oh rats! New Yorkers are filing a record number of complaints about the pesky rodents. Experts say the rat population is steady, but complaints are surging thanks to a handy new app. NEW YORK, N.Y. — Many people in New York City think the rats are taking over. Last year, more than 24,000 people complained to the city about rats. This year, the number could go even higher. One city leader calls it a "rat crisis." Not long ago, Many New Yorkers were disgusted by "Pizza Rat." They were also a little impressed. The crafty rat was a star on YouTube. Someone caught it on video dragging a large piece of pizza down a flight of stairs. Nora Prentice lives in New York City. She has complained many times about a group of about 200 rats. They live in a neighborhood park. "They're just sitting there in a lawn chair waiting for you," she said. "It's really gross." Scott Stringer feels bad about the rat problem. He is the New York City comptroller. His job is to look after the city's money. Stringer says the city does not act quickly enough when people complain about rats. He also says the city does not clean subway stations often enough. This allows the rat problem to grow. "I've seen rats walking upright, saying, 'Good morning, Mr. Comptroller," he joked. Some New York City leaders are not as worried. They do not think the rat problem is worse. They believe the number of rats has stayed about the same over the past few years. One study last year estimated there were 2 million rats in New York City. Many people who live here think the number is more like 8 million. Scientists and city leaders say it is impossible to know for sure. Caroline Bragdon is a scientist who works for the city. She is also a rat expert. She thinks there are two reasons why more people have been complaining about rats. One is that a lot of garbage was left on sidewalks last winter. It could not be picked up because there was so much snowfall. The garbage attracted rats. Another reason is the city's new cellphone app. It makes it easier for people to complain. Bragdon has about 50 people who work for her. Each month, they check dozens of buildings for rats. The city gives them about $3 million a year to help control rats. New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio is also working to fix the problem. He wants to destroy the rats' homes. He is also trying to get rid of the food they eat. Bragdon said rats only need a tiny amount of food and water to stay alive. "It's an apple core, it's a piece of a hotdog, a couple of chips. It's the crumbs." The city has tried many things to get rid of the rats. Not all of them have worked. One report said a plan to get rid of rats in the subway did not work. "There are a lot of rats, especially at night," subway rider Yessenia Alvarez said. "When they come out, it's like they're everywhere." City health inspectors search the city all of the time. They are looking for signs that many people would never notice. A tiny mound of dirt could lead to an underground rat burrow. A streak on the wall may have been left by dirty fur. "Here's a big burrow, and it's fresh," Bragdon said. She was searching a small park in New York's Chinatown neighborhood. As she pointed to the hole, a furry little head popped out. Bragdon greeted it. "Hi, mister," she said.