Oh rats! New Yorkers are filing a record number of complaints about the pesky rodents. Experts say the rat population is steady, but complaints are surging thanks to a handy new app. NEW YORK — To many in New York City, the rats are winning the war. The city's complaint hotline is on pace for a record year of rat calls. The number of complaints could exceed the more than 24,000 calls the hotline has received in each of the last two years. Blistering reviews have faulted efforts to fight what one official called a "rat crisis." And even world-weary New Yorkers were both disgusted and a little impressed by "Pizza Rat." He - or she - is the plucky rodent in a recent viral YouTube clip seen dragging a large cheese slice down a subway stairwell. Nora Prentice, who lives on Manhattan's Upper West Side, has repeatedly complained to the city about a colony of about 200 rats in a neighborhood park. "They're just sitting there in a lawn chair waiting for you," she said. "I don't know what the city can do about this rat condominium. It's really gross." Prentice said that she avoids the area because of the rats. She said the complaints she filed with the city were closed after officials told her they were "working on the problem." "It means you can't lay down and relax in that park," she said. "What kind of an answer is this?" Such gripes have found an advocate in Comptroller Scott Stringer, New York City's top financial officer in charge of the city's spending. He has added fighting the rats to his list of tasks and taken on the self-appointed role of rat czar. In separate reviews over the past two years, he has criticized the city's health department for not responding quickly enough to rat complaints. He has also denounced the Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA), which runs the subways, for not cleaning stations more regularly. Such breakdowns, he says, have allowed rats to thrive. "I've seen rats walking upright, saying, 'Good morning, Mr. Comptroller," he said. "It's unsightly to see rats running through neighborhoods like they actually bought a co-op somewhere." New York officials who have been fighting the battle for decades say rising complaint numbers don't mean there are more rats. They argue that the rat population has actually been holding steady the past few years. A Columbia University doctoral student who studied the issue last year estimated the number of rats in the city at 2 million. The research claimed to debunk a popular theory that there is one rat for each of the city's 8.4 million people. But scientists and city officials say it's impossible to accurately estimate the number. "There's no way to do that," said Caroline Bragdon, a city health department scientist and resident rat expert. Scientists can estimate the number of rats in a fixed area, like a park, by counting burrows and multiplying it by 10, but larger estimates are just not accurate, she said. Bragdon believes two things are responsible for the spike in complaints of rat sightings and conditions attracting rodents. One is that garbage was left festering on sidewalks during last winter's large snowfall. The other is that registering complaints is easier now with the city's 311 complaint line smartphone app. Bragdon's team responds to such complaints, compiles a citywide "rat index" and inspects dozens of buildings each month. What started as a team of less than a dozen has now expanded to nearly 50 people. They work with a nearly $3 million annual budget to implement the latest push to control rodents. Mayor Bill de Blasio's new "rat reservoir" plan targets communities with the highest number of rat complaints and seeks to destroy rat habitats and food sources. That effort includes setting traps, installing rodent-resistant trash cans and working on legislation that would require restaurants to hose away sludge from dripping garbage. Every little bit helps, Bragdon said. Unlike the famously hungry Pizza Rat, she says, most rats need only about an ounce of food and water daily to survive. "It's an apple core, it's a piece of a hotdog, a couple of chips. It's the crumbs," she said. "You'd much rather prevent rats from being here than treat them with poison after they're here." But not all of the new tactics have worked out. New York State Comptroller Thomas DiNapoli released a report finding little success from a pilot program by the MTA. The program was trying to test if it was possible to rid the subways of rats by removing trash cans from some stations, forcing riders to go above ground to throw away their garbage. The report said the MTA had mostly selected stations with low rodent sightings to begin with, so it was hard to gauge any reduction. City health inspectors regularly scour the city, poking into sewer grates and crawling under park foliage. They search for the signs many would never notice: tiny mounds of dirt that lead to an underground rat burrow, streaks in walls about an inch off the ground left by greasy fur, or tiny holes the critters can crawl through. "Here's a big burrow, and it's fresh," Bragdon said during a recent inspection of a small park in Manhattan's Chinatown neighborhood. The area is well-known for its rat problem. As she pointed to the hole, a furry little head popped out, revealing one of the newest generation of New York City rats. Bragdon greeted it: "Hi, mister."