Bogota banned horse carts from its streets. The drivers have been ordered to turn in their horses for a vehicle. But many of these zorreros don't have a car driver's license. BOGOTA, Colombia Luis Enrique Neira urges his scrawny horse Pagatodo through a busy street. Neira has been a horse-cart driver, or a zorrero, since he was 12 years old. He scrapes out a living hauling loads and sometimes recycling scrap metal and cardboard. Authorities say there are more than 2,290 zorreros in this bustling capital of 7.3 million, but the horsemen’s days are numbered. Bogota is requiring them to trade in their horses and carts for small four-wheel vehicles. By the year’s end, it will be illegal for horses to plod the streets. “I’ve been a zorrero all my life," said Niera. "And thank God, I’ve always made enough money to put some yucca in my soup.” The 52-year-old supports his wife, three children and five grandchildren with his horse cart. “But I guess I will have to do something else now.” Rafael Rodriguez is the city’s transportation head and is leading the program. On a recent morning, he saw about a dozen zorreros turn in their animals. Rodriguez said it’s strange to find horses and mules pulling wooden carts through this major city. Bogota is almost as large as New York City. It is South America’s second-largest capital, packed with gleaming high-rises. “It’s a big contrast for everyone who comes here to Bogota. Some years ago, you could even find cows on the streets of the city,” he said. “We have a very relaxed way of living that allows many things like this. We have to tighten up a bit because the poor animals cannot keep living like that.” Bogota has been home to working animals for centuries. Horses and mules can also be found on the streets of Buenos Aires, Santiago and Montevideo. But in those cities the animals are usually kept in village outskirts. In Bogota, horse carts are part of the landscape. They clog traffic and keep people on foot alert for horse droppings. City governments have been trying to get them off the streets for at least 50 years, Rodriguez said. The program seems to work. Of the 2,890 working horses first identified, almost 600 have been turned in. Most of those have been adopted by farms, schools and other organizations. But it’s still not clear how well the program is working for zorreros themselves. The government hopes they will keep make a living as scrap dealers and freelance haulers with their new motorized vehicles. But only 237 of the almost 3,000 zorreros in the program have a driver’s license. The city says it will provide classes. But many worry that might not happen. Rosa Garzon, 50, brought her horse Mil Amores to the trade-in. She received a paper that will entitle her to a vehicle. She said she could earn anywhere from $30 to $100 a day with her horse. But recent bypass surgery and bouts of low blood sugar make her scared of driving a motorized vehicle. “I have a car now but they’ve left me without work. I don't know how to drive,” she said, carrying a well-worn bridle. “I hope one of my children will get a license and we can still make some money.” A negative image of the horse-cart drivers was one of the problems in finding a solution, said Ricardo Mora. He works for the World Society for the Protection of Animals, which helped the city with the project. Zorreros are stereotyped as animal-abusing thugs, he said. “A lot of people were saying, ‘Let’s just take away the horses.’ ” But many zorreros have been on the job for 40 or 50 years, and have no other skills, he said. Images of skinny and mistreated horses gallop across social networks. But the vast majority of zorreros treat their animals with care. “Some of the horses do live in very trying conditions, but so do the owners,” Mora said. “I’ve seen five people living in a small room and sharing the space with their horse.” Humberto Rodriguez, 50, was dropping off his 4-year-old colt, Juancho, on a recent morning. When he was told that he couldn’t see the horse after he was adopted, he began crying. “This is like they were taking away a brother or a son,” he said. “Juancho is a very noble horse. I’m going to miss him for the rest of my life.” After he collected himself, he wondered about a horseless Bogota. “I know horses because I’ve seen them all my life,” he said. “But there are children who are never going to see one and they will always ask themselves, ‘What is a horse?’ ”