By the end of the year, horses will be forbidden from pulling carts in Colombia's capital. The drivers will be given vehicles to earn a living, but some don't have a driver's license. BOGOTA, Colombia Luis Enrique Neira urges his skinny horse Pagatodo through a busy street. Neira has been a horse-cart driver, or a zorrero, since he was 12 years old. He makes a living hauling loads. Sometimes he recycles scrap metal and cardboard. City leaders say there are more than 2,290 zorreros in this busy capital of 7.3 million. But the horsemen’s days are numbered. Bogota is making them trade in their horse and carts for small four-wheel vehicles. By the year’s end, it will be illegal for horses to be on the streets. “I’ve been a zorrero all my life," said Niera. "And thank God, I’ve always made enough money to put some yucca in my soup.” The 52-year-old supports his wife, three children and five grandchildren with his horse cart. “But I guess I will have to do something else now.” Rafael Rodriguez is leading the program. On a recent morning, he saw about a dozen zorreros turn in their animals. Rodriguez said it’s strange to find horses and mules pulling wooden carts. Bogota is almost as large as New York City. It is South America’s second-largest capital, packed with gleaming high-rises. “It’s a big contrast for everyone who comes here to Bogota. Some years ago, you could even find cows on the streets of the city,” he said. “We have a very relaxed way of living that allows many things like this. We have to tighten up a bit because the poor animals cannot keep living like that.” Bogota has been home to working animals for a long time. Horses and mules can also be found on the streets of other South American capitals. But in cities like Buenos Aires, Santiago and Montevideo they are usually kept in village outskirts. In Bogota, horse carts are part of the landscape. They clog traffic and keep people on foot on the lookout for horse droppings. The city has been trying to get them off the streets for at least 50 years. The program seems to work. Almost 600 of the 2,890 working horses have been turned in. Most of those have been adopted by farms, schools and other organizations. But it’s still not clear how well the program is working for zorreros. The government hopes they will keep make a living with their new vehicles. But only 237 of the almost 3,000 zorreros in the program have a driver’s license. The city says it will provide classes. But many worry that might not happen. Rosa Garzon, 50, brought in her horse Mil Amores. She received a paper that should get her a vehicle. She said she could earn anywhere from $30 to $100 a day. But she recently had surgery. And her low blood sugar makes her scared to drive a motorized vehicle. “I have a car now but they’ve left me without work. I don't know how to drive,” she said. “I hope one of my children will get a license." That way, her family "can still make some money.” Humberto Rodriguez was dropping off his 4-year-old colt, Juancho, on a recent morning. He learned that he couldn’t see the horse after he was adopted. He began crying. “This is like they were taking away a brother or a son,” he said. “Juancho is a very noble horse. I’m going to miss him for the rest of my life.” After he collected himself, he wondered about a horseless Bogota. “I know horses because I’ve seen them all my life,” he said. “But there are children who are never going to see one. They will always ask themselves, ‘What is a horse?’ ”