Dangerous refuge in Congo park RUMANGABO, Congo — Ndakasi is a wild mountain gorilla. Andre Bauma is a park ranger who protects her. Bauma treats Ndakasi almost like his own child. He rolls in the grass with the big hairy animal and slaps her chest with love. Ndakasi and Bauma live in the 3,000-square-mile Virunga National Park in the Democratic Republic of Congo. There are about 880 wild mountain gorillas left in the world. About one-quarter of them live in Virunga National Park. Bauma loves his gorillas. He says he would like to stay with them forever. Ndakasi was 2 months old when Bauma found her holding on to her dead mother. Her mother had been shot. Six other Virunga mountain gorillas were killed at the same time in 2007. The killers were never found. “I felt in my heart that we have to save those babies. This is our job, but it came from my heart,” says Bauma. “We have to show them they are not orphans, they are in the family. That’s why we have to play with them, to give them food, to sleep together; and they must know they have everything they need.” Virunga National Park was set up in 1925. It is the oldest and largest park in Africa. It has more animals and plants than any other park in Africa. The park cannot protect all the gorillas. For years, Congo has been one of the world’s worst war zones. The great apes have been in danger of being wiped out. They face harm from rebel soldiers. They are also at risk from people who cut down their trees. People chop down the trees for charcoal to make fires for cooking. It is worth money to people but spoils the forest for the apes. There is another danger. Companies want to drill for oil in the park. A British oil company carried out tests to find oil in Virunga in 2014. People all over the world spoke out against the tests. They did not want one of the most important natural treasures in the world to be harmed. As a result, the company said in March that it would give up its right to look for oil in the park. The greatest danger to Virunga’s animals comes from hunters and war. Many of the famous gorillas have been killed. The rangers who protect them are also attacked. In the last 20 years, 140 park rangers have been killed. People who enter the park without permission, to hunt animals or chop down trees, kill the rangers. Virunga has more than just mountain gorillas. It also has lowland gorillas and chimpanzees. Virunga is the only park in the world with three types of great apes. It makes Virunga a very important place to protect. Bauma says one serious problem is that people like to hunt in the park. Many people in Congo do not know how to save nature, says Bauma. He thinks they need to be taught. The rangers want to do more than protect the animals. They believe in teaching Congolese to care about wildlife too. The rangers want Congolese to see that they could make money and get jobs through visitors and tourism. “Virunga National Park, it’s a kind of hope for everybody, because we are working in a true way,” another ranger said. “I am hoping that in the future, Virunga will be providing many jobs for the community. In the future, Virunga will be helping our kids.”