Dangerous refuge in Congo park RUMANGABO, Congo — For Andre Bauma, Ndakasi is like his own child. He rolls in the grass with the big hairy creature and slaps her chest fondly. Ndakasi is a wild mountain gorilla and part of park ranger Bauma’s second family at the Senkwekwe Center for gorilla orphans. Senkwekwe Center is in the 3,000-square-mile Virunga National Park in the Democratic Republic of Congo. There are about 880 surviving wild mountain gorillas in the world, and about one-quarter of them reside in Virunga National Park. “I love these gorillas, yeah, and I’d like to just stay with them forever,” Bauma says. Ndakasi was 2 months old when Bauma found her holding on to her mother, who had been shot. Besides the mother, six other Virunga mountain gorillas were shot dead in mid-2007. The killers were never found, but they were believed to be linked to the illegal trade in charcoal. “I felt in my heart that we have to save those babies. This is our job, but it came from my heart,” says Bauma. Like any parent, Bauma slept in the same bed with Ndakasi. “We have to show them they are not orphans, they are in the family. That’s why we have to play with them, to give them food, to sleep together; and they must know they have everything they need,” he says. Virunga National Park was set up in 1925 and is the oldest park in Africa. It has volcanic lava craters, mountains, tropical rain forest, misty lakes and the sweeping African savanna. It is also the largest park in Africa, and has more animals and plants than any other. Yet the gorillas live in what has been one of the world’s worst war zones and most corrupt regions. The great apes have been on the edge of being wiped out for years. Threats have included soldiers and the charcoal trade, which is worth a great deal of money and hurts their natural home. Over the last two years, there has also been a plan to begin searching for oil in one of the world’s most remarkable animal parks. The British oil company SOCO carried out tests to search for oil in Virunga in 2014. People all over the world protested the tests. They did not want one of the most important natural places in the world to be harmed. As a result, the company said in March that it would give up its right to explore for oil in the park. In recent years, the threats to Virunga’s animals and those who care for them has come from poachers and the chaos of civil war. The famous gorillas have been killed — and so have the rangers. In the last 20 years, 140 park rangers have been killed by people who have entered the park without permission. The rangers have also had to try to fend off armed rebels. Innocent Mburanumwe lost his brother, a fellow ranger, in the fighting. Park director Emmanuel de Merode nearly joined the list himself last year when he was shot by unknown gunmen. “It’s not just the mountain gorillas. We’ve also got lowland gorillas and chimpanzees, so it’s the only park in the world that has three types of great apes. " The apes are helpless and under great risk. It makes Virunga an extremely important place to protect them, de Merode says. Bauma says there is a major problem in this area of the Congo. “There is the poaching. People like to hunt in the park." Another risk is that rebel groups benefit from the charcoal trade. Ancient trees are chopped up to make the fuel for cooking fires, and about $35 million worth of illegal charcoal is sold each year. The problem in Congo is that people are not very educated about how to save nature, says Bauma. “We need to educate the future generation.” The rangers see their mission as more than protecting the mountain gorillas and other species. They believe in also teaching Congolese to value the park for its wildlife. They would like people to see that it is possible to create jobs through tourism. “Virunga National Park, it’s a kind of hope for everybody, because we are working in a true way. We are fighting against corruption,” says Mburanumwe, the ranger. “I am hoping that in the future, Virunga will be providing many jobs for the community. In the future, Virunga will be helping our kids.”