A scientist was excited to discover a second species of crow that uses tools. The Hawaiian crow uses sticks to dislodge insects. The species is extinct in the wild; only about 100 are left. Before 1960, scientists assumed only humans could use tools. When Jane Goodall encountered chimpanzees using twigs as tools in 1960, she wrote a telegram to her coworker Louis Leakey. "Now we must redefine tool, redefine Man, or accept chimpanzees as humans," it said. Scientists went with the first option. Half a century later, the list of tool users includes other primates, elephants, dolphins and sea otters, among others. The phenomenon is still relatively rare, though, found in less than 1 percent of all species. The discovery of a new tool user is big news. As reported in the journal Nature, the Hawaiian crow holds twigs in its teeth to dig insects and other food out of hard-to-reach spots. It is only the second member of its genus known to do this. "The exciting wider context is, if you have only a single species using tools, you're trying to explain a singularity, and scientifically you're not really winning with that," said Christian Rutz, a behavioral ecologist at the University of St. Andrews and the lead author of the study. "But a second species provides leverage for cautiously asking evolutionary questions about how they evolved and perhaps even to start speculating about the origin of tool use in humans." For more than a decade, Rutz has been studying New Caledonian crows, the first member of the genus Corvus known for natural tool use. Chicks from the Pacific island species instinctively pick up twigs with their beaks and use them to scrape up food. They break off branches and fashion them into hooks or barbs to suit their needs. These birds were thought to be a biological oddity.  Still, "I had a suspicion that there may be undiscovered tool users out there," Rutz said. "There are over 40 species of crows and ravens, and so many of them are understudied, I thought, 'OK, maybe one of them.'" The trouble was figuring out which one. Many members of the genus live in small, threatened communities on hard-to reach islands. Rutz couldn't fly to each one and hope to happen upon an avian tool user by chance. That's when he had his eureka moment. Unlike many other corvids, New Caledonian crows have straight beaks. Straight beaks make it easier to handle twigs than the more common curved ones. The crows also have incredibly big eyes and excellent depth recognition. "I figured, if we search for straight bills and large eyes we can find other candidate species," Rutz said. A quick image search revealed his best target: the large, all-black Hawaiian crow, known on its home island as 'alala. It has a straight, blunt beak. Though its eyes are relatively small, they are extremely forward-facing, a modification that allows for depth recognition. Rutz called the program manager at a captive breeding facility in Hawaii run by the San Diego Zoo. "I said, 'Look this may sound a bit crazy but I have a hunch your birds may be tool users,'" he recalled. "And the guy replied, 'Oh yeah, they do all sorts of funny things with sticks.' " Rutz and his co-workers designed a series of experiments to test whether the crows really were natural tool users. First, they observed more than 100 adult crows and found that 93 percent would spontaneously pick up a stick to dig for hard-to-reach food. In another test, hatchlings were kept apart from adults to determine if the behavior was natural or learned. Without training or example, the young crows picked up and played with sticks, then figured out how to use them. "That strongly suggests that the species has genetic predispositions that lead to development of functional tool use," Rutz said. This doesn't mean the crows have a "tool-use gene," or that they're programmed from birth to know how to dig with a stick. "It's not as simple as that," Rutz said. "More likely, they have a developmental program that is under genetic influence that makes them engage with objects and explore their environment." Birds are likely predisposed to be curious about objects, like human toddlers. Putting them to use is up to the individual, not genetics. The Hawaiian crows are separated from their New Caledonian siblings by more than 6,000 kilometers of ocean. Their tool use could be an example of two species separately evolving the same trait. Both species share commonalities with another well-known natural tool user, the Galapagos woodpecker finch. All three are tropical species, living on small islands with few predators and little competition for the insects they love to eat, which live in logs and trees. "Now we can cautiously start constructing evolutionary arguments about the origins of tool use," Rutz said. "And of course, ultimately this enables much broader comparisons, with non-tool using species, with primates. We can ask whether similar ecological conditions seemed to drive the evolution of this behavior in different parts of the animal kingdom. That's where it gets exciting." The world came close to never knowing this discovery. Wild Hawaiian crows have been extinct since the early 2000s. The only representatives of the species remaining are those bred in confinement by conservationists from the San Diego Zoo. There are 109 known Hawaiian crows still alive. "Let this discovery serve to emphasize the importance to conserving these and other animal species," said Goodall, the mother of animal tool use research. "These discoveries show how much there is still to learn about animal behavior."