A scientist was excited to discover a second species of crow that uses tools. The Hawaiian crow uses sticks to dislodge insects. The species is extinct in the wild; only about 100 are left. We used to think only people used tools. In fact, we thought tools were what made humans, human. In 1960, scientist Jane Goodall saw chimps using sticks. She was surprised. They were using sticks as tools. People were not the only ones using tools.  Now we know other animals can use tools. We know primates, elephants, dolphins and sea otters use them, too. Still, it is rare. Most animals do not know how to use tools.  Scientist Christian Rutz made a discovery. He found a new tool user. The Hawaiian crow holds sticks in its mouth. The sticks are used to dig for food.  For many years, Rutz studied a different crow called New Caledonian. It picked up sticks with its mouth. Scientists thought it was the only crow to do it. New Caledonian crows have straight bills. This makes it easier to hold sticks. They have big eyes. This makes it easier to see. Rutz looked for other crows with straight bills and big eyes. The Hawaiian crow has a straight bill. There are some Hawaiian crows in a zoo. A worker at the zoo told Rutz the crows used sticks. Rutz went to see. He watched more than 100 grown-up crows. Most of them used sticks. They would pick up sticks to dig for food. He watched the young crows. Without anyone showing them how, they played with sticks. They figured out how to use them.  The Hawaiian and New Caledonian crows do the same thing. They could not learn from each other. After all, they do not live near one another. Another bird that uses sticks is the Galapagos woodpecker finch. All three birds live on small islands. They all live far from each other. This means they learned to use tools on their own. It was almost too late to find out about the Hawaiian crows. They were dying out. There are only 109 Hawaiian crows still alive. They live in the zoo. Zoo workers are trying to save them. They are protecting the crows. More baby crows are being hatched. Jane Goodall says this discovery is important. It shows why we need to protect animals. She says there is still a lot to learn from them. Maybe we can learn more about ourselves. We can learn how humans learned to use tools.