A scientist was excited to discover a second species of crow that uses tools. The Hawaiian crow uses sticks to dislodge insects. The species is extinct in the wild; only about 100 are left. Scientists once thought only humans could use tools. Then Jane Goodall saw chimpanzees using twigs as tools in 1960.  "Now we must redefine tool, redefine Man, or accept chimpanzees as humans," she said. Fifty years later, scientists know primates, elephants, dolphins, sea otters, and others can use tools. Tool use in animals is still very rare. In any group of animals, about one out of every 100 use tools. The discovery of a new tool user is important. We now know the Hawaiian crow holds twigs in its teeth. It uses the twigs to dig insects and other food out of hard-to-reach spots. It is the second known type of crow to do this. Scientist Christian Rutz is in charge of this new study. He said that finding a single group of animals doing a certain behavior does not prove enough. Finding a second group is exciting. Two groups with the same behaviors could mean that it is a sign of how animals evolved to use tools. Animals have genes, which they get from their parents. These genes give the animal its traits and its differences. Sometimes, an animal will have a trait that makes it unlike other animals in its species. If that trait helps it survive, it can mean that many, many years later, more animals in that species will have that trait. This process is called evolution. Scientists thought maybe the crows evolved to use tools. They want to know whether there is a connection to humans using tools. For over 10 years, Rutz has been studying New Caledonian crows. They are the first kind of crow known for natural tool use. New Caledonian chicks pick up twigs with their beaks. They use the twigs to scrape up food. They break off branches and turn them into hooks. Scientists thought these crows were the only ones. Rutz thought there may be others. He knew there were over 40 types of crows and ravens. Many had not been studied much. He thought one might use tools. The trouble was figuring out which one. Many live in small, threatened communities on isolated islands. Rutz couldn't fly all over and hope to see one by chance. Then he had his moment of discovery. New Caledonian crows have straight beaks. Straight beaks make it easier to handle twigs. They also have big eyes, making it easier to see. Rutz set out to look for  more crows with "straight bills and large eyes." He thought he might find more tool-using birds. The large, all-black Hawaiian crow is known on its home island as 'alala. It has a straight, flat beak. Its eyes are small but forward-facing, which helps with vision. Rutz called the head of a program in Hawaii run by the San Diego Zoo. Rutz said, "Look, this may sound a bit crazy but I have a hunch your birds may be tool users." The man he called said yes, his birds used sticks to "do all sorts of funny things." Rutz and his co-workers watched more than 100 grown crows. Ninety-three of them picked up sticks to dig for food. In another test, hatchlings were kept from their parents. Without training or examples, the young crows played with sticks and figured out how to use them. Rutz said this could mean the crows were born with a trait that led it to tool use. This doesn't mean the crows have a "tool-use gene." They are not programmed from birth knowing how to dig with a stick. More likely, birds are predisposed to be curious about objects, like human toddlers. The Hawaiian and New Caledonian crows live almost 4,000 miles apart. This is an example of two groups separately evolving the same habit. Both birds share similarities with another well-known natural tool user, the Galapagos woodpecker finch. All three are tropical and live on small islands with few predators competing for the insects they love to eat. Rutz said we can start thinking about how tool use in animals came about. We can compare the habits of crows with other groups of animals who don't use tools. We can compare them to tool users like humans, apes and monkeys.  It was almost too late for this discovery. Wild Hawaiian crows have been dying out since the early 2000s. There are 109 known living Hawaiian crows. Jane Goodall said this shows how important it is to conserve animals. She said, "These discoveries show how much there is still to learn about animal behavior."