Researchers have engineered 3-D printer materials with surfaces that can change texture on demand Sometimes engineers get ideas from the most unlikely places. 3-D printing and cuttlefish don't seem to have anything in common. Yet the engineers who created a new 3-D printing process said they looked to the cuttlefish for inspiration. 3-D printing is a new way to make all sorts of things, from jewelry to airplane engines. Instead of being two-dimensional or flat, objects can be printed as 3-D, or three-dimensional. First, an object is designed on a computer. Then the design is sent to a 3-D printer. 3-D printers can turn plastic into objects of any shape. 3-D printers used to be able to make only solid and hard objects, like car parts. Now, engineers have made a new type of printing process. It can be used to print soft 3-D materials. "This project was originally about camouflage," says Mark Guttag, the lead engineer of the new printer. Guttag studied the cuttlefish because it's good at camouflage, or blending into its surroundings. The cuttlefish is not a fish; it is a sea animal related to the octopus. Cuttlefish have large, stretchy bodies and tentacles around their mouths. They often hide from predators by changing their skin color to blend in. Most interesting to the engineers is that the cuttlefish can change the feel, or texture, of its skin. Guttag and an engineering professor, Mary Boyce, were inspired by the cuttlefish. They wanted to create surfaces that can change textures, just like the cuttlefish. The engineers developed a 3-D printing process that uses polymers. Polymers are the tiny pieces that make up plastics and are used in a variety of materials. The engineers used hard and soft polymers. The 3-D printer puts the hard polymers into the softer, squishy polymer material. Then the two are squeezed. The engineers found that this makes the smooth surface of the soft polymer become like the hard polymer. The hard polymer can be smooth, bumpy or rough. This can make the soft polymer material become smooth, bumpy or rough. When the two polymers are no longer squeezed, the material returns to its original smooth texture. Shengqiang Cai is an engineer at the University of California in San Diego. He was not part of the cuttlefish study but is very interested in what the scientists did. He thinks it could help engineers make many new, interesting materials. He also thinks it will help scientists understand how animals like cuttlefish change their patterns. Once the material is created by the 3-D printer, its polymers are usually stuck in a fixed order. Guttag and Boyce have thought of some ways to get different types of surfaces. Engineers can use stretched pieces of hard polymers instead of round ones. Then, they could make surfaces that are both smooth one way and rough the other way. Also, if the polymers are squeezed differently, it can produce a different surface. If they are lightly squeezed, the surface feels one way. Squeeze them a little harder, though, and it could cause the tiny pieces of polymers to rotate. This will create a different surface and feel. The engineers have discovered their new changeable surface is useful in other ways, too. It can make an object move through the air more easily. It can even make some objects reflective and waterproof. The new type of 3-D printing could bring new possibilities to many different businesses.