A big dinosaur like Diplodocus had to eat a lot. That wore down its teeth. When it lost a tooth, a new one came in. Dinosaurs had an awful lot of teeth. They also grew new ones all the time. Sauropods were one kind of dinosaur. Some sauropods grew new teeth as often as twice a month. Other teeth were waiting behind each tooth. When one tooth fell out, another one took its place. Tyrannosaurus rex is called the king of the dinosaurs. But sauropods were even bigger. They were the largest land animal ever. A big T. rex was about 45 feet tall. But a big sauropod was 100 feet long. Sauropods must have looked very scary. But they were vegetarians. They only ate plants. Scientist Michael D'Emic is very interested in dinosaurs. He has been since he was a kid. D'Emic has written a new report about dinosaur teeth. D'Emic knew that sauropods were very, very big. This meant they had to eat an awful lot of food. So he wondered: Had all that eating made their jaws and teeth unusual? To find out more, he went looking for sauropod jaws. He found a Camarasaurus jaw. He also found a Diplodocus jaw. Both of these animals were types of sauropods. They lived about 150 million years ago. Both lived in the same place. D'Emic broke apart the dinosaur jaws. He removed the 30 teeth he could see. D'Emic did this to get to the backup teeth. Behind every tooth, the Camarasaurus had three more teeth. These were waiting to be used. The Diplodocus had even more. It had five spare teeth behind each tooth. Camarasaurus had larger teeth. New teeth came in about once every two months. Diplodocus had smaller, narrower teeth. It grew new teeth about once a month. D'Emic had questions. How could two giant plant-eating dinosaurs live together in the same place? How could there be enough food for both of them? D'Emic thinks Diplodocus grazed on plants close to the ground. That meant Camarasaurus had plenty of food up high. There was enough for everyone. There's something else. Because Diplodocus ate plants low to the ground, they took in a lot of sand. And chewing on sand wore down their teeth. And if your teeth get worn down quickly, guess what helps? Having a lot of spares helps!