What color were the flying dinosaurs? Some scientists say clues are in tiny spots on feather fossils. They call them color bits. But another scientist says they may be just bacteria. PHILADELPHIA — Scientists who study animals and plants from the time of the dinosaurs are called paleontologists. They have a mystery on their hands. They are arguing about what some tiny spots mean on dinosaur feathers. The feathers are fossilized, or preserved. But the scientists still don't know what colors the dinosaurs they belonged to were. Most paleontologists think the blobs on the feathers are super small bits of color. These bits are called pigment granules. Scientists think the blobs could help them know more about the colors of winged dinosaurs. A new study offers a different explanation. It has also upset a lot of scientists. Alison E. Moyer is studying for an advanced degree at North Carolina State University. She says the tiny spots might simply be left over from very old bacteria. Bacteria are very small living things. Every animal has bacteria inside of them. The size and shape of the spots could mean they are bacteria. Or it could mean they are color bits. Bacteria and color bits "look very similar, and so we have to be careful,” said Moyer. Matthew D. Shawkey works at the University of Akron. He has responded to the paper on the Internet. He says Moyer's study has problems. Shawkey thinks the blobs are pigment granules. Others in the field have been more accepting of Moyer’s work. They say it is a helpful challenge to what scientists currently think. Paleontology is different than other types of science. There is only one sure way to answer certain questions about the ancient world. You would have to travel back in a time machine. Since this is impossible, Moyer found a living time machine: a chicken. Paleontologists think birds are modern dinosaurs. Moyer took chicken feathers and grew bacteria on them. She compared the bacteria with the pigment granules inside the feathers. She also compared them with the spots from dinosaur fossils. The size, shape, and other things suggest the spots are bacteria. But it is still possible that they were pigment granules, she said. Her work was overseen by N.C. State's Mary H. Schweitzer. She is a well-known paleontologist. Shawkey disagrees with Moyer. He was involved in a 2012 study. The study found that the feathers of the winged dinosaur Archaeopteryx were black. He had several objections to Moyer’s paper. His biggest problem was how the two images were placed together. One showed oval-shaped bacteria on a chicken feather. The other showed similar-shaped impressions found in a feather from Archaeopteryx. The dark shapes in the two images look about the same size. Shawkey argues that the bacteria on the chicken feathers are actually much bigger. He says they are four times as long as the ones in the Archaeopteryx feathers. “That’s not a good way to give confidence in your paper,” Shawkey said. Moyer says that the bacteria are closer to twice the length of the impressions on the Archaeopteryx feathers. The graininess of the image makes it a bit hard to tell who is right. Another scientist thought the Moyer study was useful. “It’s always good to take one step back,” said Johan Lindgren. He is an associate professor at Lund University in Sweden. He said this even though he thinks the shapes are pigment granules.