If someone could build a time machine and go back to prehistoric times, we'd know for sure what color dinosaurs were. For now, those tiny dots offer the best clues. PHILADELPHIA — What color were winged dinosaurs? It's a tricky question for scientists, who are examining tiny dots on fossils of dinosaur feathers. Scientists currently think the oval-shaped blobs are microscopic remains of ancient pigment granules, or bits of animal coloring. Scientists think the granules offer clues to the colors of winged dinosaurs. But a new study by a Drexel University graduate proposes a different explanation. The study has upset some scientists. Alison E. Moyer, now a Ph.D. student at North Carolina State University, says the oval-shaped “microbodies” might simply be impressions left by very old bacteria. The impressions are just one-millionth of a meter long. Their size and shape, among other characteristics, do not rule out either interpretation, she says. “You have these little structures that look very similar, and so we have to be careful,” said Moyer. She is the lead author of the paper published this month in the journal Scientific Reports. The study has prompted a heated social media response from one researcher who favors the interpretation that the shapes are melanosomes, or pigment granules. Others in the field have been more accepting of Moyer’s work. They acknowledge it as a helpful challenge to established views. Such give-and-take may happen more often in paleontology than in some other fields of science. The only sure way to answer certain questions about the ancient world would be to travel back in a time machine. Because that is impossible, Moyer found a living time machine: a chicken. Paleontologists consider birds to be modern dinosaurs. Moyer took chicken feathers and grew bacteria on them. She compared the bacteria with the pigment granules inside the feathers, as well as with the impressions found in ancient feathers from winged dinosaurs. The size, shape, and other characteristics suggested bacteria, though it is still possible that they were pigment granules, she said. Her work was overseen by famous North Carolina State University paleontologist Mary H. Schweitzer. Co-authors included Ken Lacovara, who teaches paleontology and geology at Drexel University. A professor at the University of Akron in Ohio disagreed with the study. Matthew D. Shawkey said on Twitter that the new research was “bad science.” Shawkey was involved in a 2012 study that determined the feathers of the winged dinosaur Archaeopteryx were black. He had several objections to Moyer’s paper. His main objection was how two images were placed together. One showed oval-shaped bacteria on a chicken feather, the other depicted similar-shaped impressions found in a feather from Archaeopteryx. At a glance, the dark shapes in the two images look about the same size. Shawkey argues that the bacteria on the chicken feathers are actually four times as long as the impressions in the Archaeopteryx feathers. “That’s not a good way to give confidence in your paper,” Shawkey said. Moyer counters that the bacteria are closer to twice the length of the impressions on the Archaeopteryx feathers. To the untrained eye, the graininess of the image makes it a bit hard to tell who is right. Moyer said that the size of what are supposed to be pigment granules falls well within the range of the sizes of known bacteria. Another scientist who has interpreted the shapes as pigment granules thought the study was useful. “It’s always good to take one step back,” said Johan Lindgren, a professor at Lund University in Sweden. So how did the other scientists conclude anything about the color of dinosaur feathers? After all, the only thing left of the pigment granules was their fossilized imprints. The key was their shape. By looking at what granule shapes were associated with which colors in modern birds, the scientists concluded that various winged dinosaurs were black, gray or brown. Or maybe not. “There’s a ton of work that needs to be done,” said Moyer.