Some scientists say tiny dots on fossil feathers are bits of color. But another scientist, using a chicken, says the dots might be just bacteria. Her theory has ruffled some feathers. PHILADELPHIA — Scientists who study animals and plants from the time of the dinosaurs have a mystery on their hands. They are arguing about what some spots, or blobs, mean. Scientists currently think the blobs are super small remains of ancient pigment granules — bits of animal coloring. Scientists think the blobs are clues to the colors of winged dinosaurs. But a new study offers a different explanation and has upset some scientists. Alison E. Moyer is studying for an advanced degree at North Carolina State University. She says the oval-shaped blobs might simply be remains from very old bacteria. Bacteria are tiny living things. All animals have bacteria growing inside of them. The blobs on the dinosaur feathers are also tiny. They are just one-millionth of a meter long. Their size and shape could mean they are bacteria, but it could also mean they are color bits. “You have these little structures that look very similar, and so we have to be careful,” said Moyer. She is the lead author of the study's paper published this month. One researcher, Matthew D. Shawkey, has responded on the Internet. He says Moyer's study has problems. Shawkey thinks the blobs are something called melanosomes, or pigment granules. Others in the field have been more accepting of Moyer’s work, saying it is a helpful challenge to established views. People who study dinosaurs and other prehistoric life are called paleontologists. Paleontology is different than other types of science because what they study is long gone. The only sure way to answer certain questions about the ancient world would be to travel back in a time machine. Failing that, Moyer found a living time machine: a chicken. Paleontologists consider birds to be modern dinosaurs. Moyer took chicken feathers and grew bacteria on them. She compared the bacteria with the pigment granules inside the feathers. She also compared them with the impressions found in ancient feathers from winged dinosaurs. The size, shape, and other characteristics of the spots suggest they are bacteria. But it is still possible that they were pigment granules, she said. Her work was overseen by N.C. State's Mary H. Schweitzer, a well-known paleontologist. Shawkey is an associate professor at the University of Akron and he disagrees with Moyer. He said on Twitter that the new research was “bad science.” Shawkey was involved in a 2012 study that determined the feathers of the winged dinosaur Archaeopteryx were black. He had several problems with Moyer’s paper. The biggest issue he had was how two images were placed together. One showed oval-shaped bacteria on a chicken feather. The other showed similar-shaped impressions found in a feather from an Archaeopteryx. The dark shapes in the two images look about the same size. Shawkey argues that the bacteria on the chicken feathers are actually much bigger. He says they are four times as long as the impressions in the Archaeopteryx feathers. “That’s not a good way to give confidence in your paper,” Shawkey said. Moyer counters that the bacteria are closer to twice the length of the impressions on the Archaeopteryx feathers. To the untrained eye, the graininess of the image makes it a bit hard to tell who is right. Another scientist who has said the shapes were pigment granules thought the Moyer study was useful. “It’s always good to take one step back,” said Johan Lindgren. He is an associate professor at Lund University in Sweden. So how did the other scientists find anything out about the color of dinosaur feathers? After all, the only thing left of the color bits were in fossils. The key was their shape. Scientists looked at what shapes were associated with which colors in modern birds. Then they found that various winged dinosaurs were black, gray or brown. But they are not sure. "There’s a ton of work that needs to be done,” Moyer said.