New research shows that some plant-eating dinosaurs digested shellfish. Do you think dinosaurs stuck to a strict diet? Think again. Researchers studying fossilized dinosaur feces, or really old poop, from about 75 million years ago have discovered that at least some plant-eating dinosaurs also snacked on shellfish.  Researchers discovered crustacean, or shellfish, remains in fossils of poop from plant-eating dinosaurs. The finding reveals that the creatures may have had more complex eating habits than previously thought. Scientists studying the creatures of the past usually look at the bones these animals left behind. Bones reveal a lot about an animal's shape. They do not, however, present much information on how an animal actually interacted with its environment. A prime example of this would be how that animal fit into its ecosystem’s complex food system. That’s why a dinosaur’s poo is a paleontologist’s precious stone. When preserved in the right environment to become a fossil, it can reveal a lot about what a dinosaur was actually eating. Fossilized poop is called a coprolite. Karen Chin is a paleontologist at the University of Colorado in Boulder. “Direct evidence for diet in the fossil record is very rare,” Chin said. “We are usually forced to rely simply on the bones, so we study the teeth and the jaw... So when we find coprolites like these … they do provide a different perspective on the diet.” These particular samples were discovered in southern Utah at the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument’s Kaiparowits Formation. They were dark — a sign that they had been filled with rotting wood. The researchers could tell that the wood had been rotting before the animals ate it. When wood breaks down with the help of mushrooms, its complex sugars are released. These sugars can be nutritious for animals. Though it might seem weird that a plant-eater would eat rotting tree bits, it’s not totally out of the question, Chin said. Similar wood-filled dinosaur dung had been found in Montana, too.  An even stranger finding than the wood was the shellfish pieces. Researchers found fragments of what appeared to be crustacean shell in 10 of the 15 specimens they studied.  One specimen full of crustacean bits could have been a fluke, but Chin and other researchers found the shell-filled dung over three different levels of rock. Levels of rock represent the passage of time. This means that the eating behavior happened over perhaps very long periods of time. The scientists say the plant-eating dinosaurs were probably hadrosaurs. Hadrosaurs were large duck-billed dinosaurs that ate plants and lived in the area. They had rows of teeth in their mouths. This unique trait allowed them as plant eaters to chomp through wood and even shells, too. Why would these animals eat crustaceans? Chin’s hypothesis is this: Herbivores can’t rely on rotting wood year-round. There wouldn’t be enough of it to go around, so it was probably an occasional meal. She wondered whether the crustaceans were eaten along with the rotting wood during breeding season, when dinosaurs would need all the extra nutrients like calcium and protein to lay their eggs. This idea might be similar to some bird behavior. Birds are related to dinosaurs. Chin pointed out that some seed-eating birds look for insects when it comes time to lay eggs, probably seeking out the extra proteins and minerals. If that’s the case for these dinosaurs, then their eating habits may have been far more complex than previously thought, Chin said. Of course, it’s nearly impossible to know the animals’ intentions. Even if dinosaurs were still around, we wouldn't be able to ask them whether they ate crustaceans by accident or by choice. Chin points out that the shelled animals were probably at least 5 centimeters. They were big enough that a hadrosaur would have noticed and could have spit them out if it wanted. Jordan Mallon is a paleontologist at the Canadian Museum of Nature in Ottawa. He said he didn’t think the dinosaurs were intentionally eating the crustaceans. In all likelihood, the crustaceans were an unintentional addition to the meal. Plenty of ocean animals today end up with all kinds of plastic or other man-made materials in their guts, Mallon pointed out.  Regardless, he added, the findings highlight how important it is to continue digging into dinosaur droppings. “I think what she’s been showing is that these fossilized blobs of poo are worth looking at a little further,” Mallon said of Chin and her work. “I think it’s showing that there’s some interesting things to be found in there; that we bear to learn a lot from looking at them.”