Dinosaurs in trouble before asteroid hit A giant asteroid slammed into Earth 65 million years ago. It caused tsunamis, earthquakes, fires and a global winter, and it led to the end of the dinosaurs. What if the asteroid had glided safely past our planet? Would dinosaurs still be here today? New research just published in a science journal suggests the answer is probably not. Instead, scientists have found evidence that dinosaurs were in a long, slow decline that began millions of years before the asteroid struck. Dinosaur species were vanishing faster than new species were emerging at least 40 million years before the asteroid struck, scientists said. The Chicxulub asteroid that smashed into what is now modern-day Mexico only made it tougher for dinosaurs to survive. “There is no doubt that the Chicxulub impact was the final nail in the dinosaurs’ coffin — with the exception of birds,” said British scientists Manabu Sakamoto and Chris Venditti. They believe that if the rate of the dinosaurs' decline had continued as it was then, that dinosaurs would have entirely disappeared. Dinosaurs were already in an evolutionary decline long before the arrival of the asteroid that finally wiped them out, the scientists said. For years, scientists have debated whether dinosaurs were in becoming extinct before the asteroid struck. Recent attempts to address this question relied mostly on counting the number of fossils in the different geological time bins, Sakamoto said. Fossils are traces or prints in rock formations of animals or plants from long ago. In their new study, the British scientists looked at phylogenic trees. They are branch-like diagrams that show the evolutionary relationships of different species. This allowed them to study the rates at which dinosaurs were heading into extinction. It also showed the rates at which new species developed in the three groupings of dinosaurs through time. The development of new species is known as speciation. The researchers found that speciation was in a long-term decline across all dinosaurs. It was exceeded by extinction rates between 48 million and 53 million years before the Chicxulub event. The authors are not sure what caused the development rate of new dinosaur species to slow down. But they have a few ideas. They explain that the Cretaceous Period (145.5 million to 65.5 million years ago) was a time of big geological changes. The global climate was cooling, there was prolonged volcanic activity, and the continents were breaking apart. “Any combination of these processes could have affected dinosaur speciation,” Sakamoto and Venditti said. It is also possible that competition from mammals — which were just small, rodent-like creatures at the time — had something to do with it. Sakamoto and Venditti said recent studies show that mammals were on the rise before the asteroid struck. They believe those new studies support their own findings.