New research shows that some plant-eating dinosaurs digested shellfish. Do you think dinosaurs stuck to a strict diet? Think again. Scientists have been studying fossilized dinosaur feces, or really old poop, from about 75 million years ago. They discovered that at least some plant-eating dinosaurs also snacked on shellfish.  Researchers discovered shellfish remains in the dinosaur poop. This could mean that the creatures had more complex eating habits than previously thought. Dinosaurs went extinct 66 million years ago. Scientists studying the creatures of the past usually look at their bones, or fossils. Bones reveal a lot about an animal's shape. However, bones do not show how an animal actually interacted with its environment. A prime example of this would be how that animal fit into its ecosystem’s food chain. That’s why a dinosaur’s poo is a paleontologist’s precious stone. When preserved in the right environment to become a fossil, it can reveal much about what a dinosaur was actually eating. Fossilized poop is called a coprolite. Karen Chin is a paleontologist at the University of Colorado in Boulder. She studies dinosaur poop in order to learn more about what dinosaurs ate.  “Direct evidence for diet in the fossil record is very rare,” Chin said. “So when we find coprolites like these … they do provide a different perspective on the diet.” These particular samples were discovered in southern Utah at the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument’s Kaiparowits Formation. This large plateau is home to many dinosaur fossils. The coprolites were dark, a sign that they had been filled with rotting wood. The researchers could tell that the wood had been rotting before the animals ate it. When wood breaks down with the help of mushrooms, its complex sugars are released. These sugars can be nutritious for animals. The shellfish pieces were an even stranger finding. Researchers found fragments of what appeared to be crustacean shell in 10 of the 15 specimens they studied.  Chin and other researchers found the shell-filled poop over three different levels of rock. Levels of rock represent the passage of time. This means that the eating behavior happened over perhaps very long periods of time. The scientists say the plant-eating dinosaurs were probably hadrosaurs. Hadrosaurs were large duck-billed dinosaurs that ate plants and lived in the area. They had rows of teeth in their mouths. This special trait allowed the plant-eaters to chomp through wood and even shells, too. Why would these animals eat crustaceans? Chin believes that herbivores couldn't rely on rotting wood year-round. It was probably an occasional meal. She wondered whether the crustaceans may have been eaten along with the rotting wood during breeding season. That way they could get extra nutrients from the shellfish like calcium and protein. The nutrients could have been useful for laying eggs. This idea might be similar to some bird behavior. Scientists believe birds are related to dinosaurs. Chin pointed out that some seed-eating birds look for insects when it comes time to lay eggs. They are probably seeking out the extra proteins and minerals. If that’s the case for these dinosaurs, then their eating habits may have been far more advanced than previously thought, Chin said. Of course, it’s nearly impossible to understand why the animal ate what it did. Were the shellfish eaten by accident or by choice? Even if dinosaurs were still around, we would not be able to ask them. Chin points out that the shelled animals were probably big enough that a hadrosaur would have noticed them and could have spit them out if it wanted. Jordan Mallon is a paleontologist at the Canadian Museum of Nature in Ottawa. He doesn’t think the dinosaurs ate the shellfish on purpose. Regardless, he thinks the findings show how important it is to continue digging into dinosaur droppings. “I think what she’s been showing is that these fossilized blobs of poo are worth looking at a little further,” Mallon said. “I think it’s showing that there’s some interesting things to be found in there.”