New research shows that some plant-eating dinosaurs digested shellfish. Do you think dinosaurs ate the same thing every day? Think again.  Scientists usually put dinosaurs into groups. The groups are based on what the dinosaurs ate. Carnivores ate other animals. Herbivores ate plants. Omnivores ate both plants and animals.  Scientists can look at fossils of dinosaur poop to see what they ate. They found that some plant-eating dinosaurs also snacked on shellfish. Dinosaurs went extinct 66 million years ago. Scientists study them through fossils. Bone fossils say a lot about an animal's shape and skeleton. They do not show its eating habits.  Poop fossils show what a dinosaur ate. This makes them very important to paleontologists. Paleontologists are scientists who study fossils.  These fossils were found in southern Utah at the Kaiparowits Formation. This is a large plateau with many dinosaur fossils. The fossils found there were dark. This means they were filled with rotting wood. Rotting wood has sugars. These sugars can be good for animals. The fossils also had pieces of shellfish. Karen Chin is a paleontologist. She works at the University of Colorado. Chin and other scientists found the poop fossils in three levels of rock. Each level formed in a different period of time. This means that the dinosaurs could have eaten shellfish for a long time. The scientists believe the dinosaurs were probably hadrosaurs. Hadrosaurs were large dinosaurs with duck bills. They ate plants and lived in the area. They had rows of teeth in their mouths. With so many teeth, they could chomp through wood and even shells. Why did these animals eat shellfish? Chin believes there was not enough wood to eat all year round. They ate shellfish when it was time to breed. The shellfish gave them extra nutrients. Scientists believe birds and dinosaurs are related. Some birds who eat seeds do something similar, Chin says. The birds look for insects when it is time to lay eggs. It is hard to understand why animals eat certain things. Were the shellfish eaten by accident? Chin thinks the shellfish were big enough for dinosaurs to notice and spit out. Jordan Mallon is another paleontologist. He doesn’t think the dinosaurs ate the shellfish on purpose. Still, he thinks that Chin's work is important. The "fossilized blobs of poo" can teach us a lot about dinosaurs, he says.