A new study has found that huge plant-eating dinosaurs like Diplodocus has plenty of replacement teeth in their jaws. Some grew a new tooth once every two weeks. Dinosaurs must have kept the tooth fairy busy. New research shows that the dinosaurs known as sauropods produced new teeth as often as twice per month. And they had up to nine backup teeth in a single tooth socket. While the terrifying Tyrannosaurus rex is known as the king of the dinosaurs, the sauropods were even bigger. These creatures, including the Apatosaurus (previously known as Brontosaurus), were the largest animals that ever walked on land. A big T. rex was around 45 feet tall. But a huge sauropod was 100 feet long or more, said Michael D’Emic, a scientist at Stony Brook University in New York. D'Emic is a vertebrate paleontologist — he studies ancient animals. He is the main author of the teeth study published Wednesday. D'Emic has been fascinated with dinosaurs since he was a child. He knew that because sauropods were enormous, they had to eat a huge amount of food. This made him wonder: Had all that eating made their jaws and teeth evolve — change over time — in some special way? Since sauropods were vegetarians, D’Emic assumed their teeth would be well worn from munching tough plant matter. To investigate, he went looking for sauropod jaws. He found teeth in plenty of museums. What was hard was convincing a museum to let him tear apart an entire jaw. “I had to search collections for jaws that had a lot of teeth but that were ratty or fragmentary,” D’Emic said. D'Emic was lucky. He found a Camarasaurus jaw dug up in southern Utah, and a Diplodocus jaw from Colorado. Both animals lived about 150 million years ago during the Jurassic Period. They were types of sauropods that lived side by side. The next step was to break apart the jaws. Not only did he want to remove the 30 teeth he could see, he also wanted to get to the backup teeth inside the tooth sockets. In other words, he needed to pull some teeth. “That had to be done by a professional, somebody with a surgeon’s hands and patience,” D’Emic said. Patience indeed. Behind every visible tooth, the Camarasaurus had three backup teeth lined up and ready for use. The Diplodocus had even more — five spares behind each visible tooth. It took six months for the dino-dentist to extract and prepare the teeth. Each one was sanded and polished by hand, sawed up, mounted on slides, and then photographed for study. D’Emic was not only interested in seeing how many spare teeth sauropods had. He also wanted to figure out how quickly those teeth came in. When the teeth were cut into thin sections, D'Emic saw lines inside each tooth. By counting those lines, he was able to tell the age of a tooth — much like you can tell the age of a tree by counting rings. He then looked at the difference in age between each backup tooth and the one beneath it. That way he was able to estimate how quickly teeth were replaced. Camarasaurus, with its larger, broader-crowned teeth, had a new tooth come in about once every two months. Diplodocus, with smaller, narrower teeth, had a replacement about once a month. D'Emic claims that one type of sauropod called Nigersaurus replaced its teeth every two weeks, with nine spares for every tooth. D’Emic also noticed that more recent sauropods, like Diplodocus, had smaller, narrower teeth that got replaced a lot faster. He wondered: Why had they evolved that way? Sauropods didn’t actually chew their salad — they clipped it off with their teeth and then swallowed it whole. Perhaps having teeth replaced faster kept them sharp enough for the hard work of cutting vegetation off trees or bushes, D’Emic said. Another theory is that because Diplodocus only did one thing with their teeth, they didn't need strong teeth that lasted a long while. “All the tooth had to do was snip,” D’Emic said. So, rather than strong teeth, it had lots of teeth instead. Finally, there was the question of how two gigantic plant-eating dinosaurs could live together in the same area. How could there be enough food for both of them? D’Emic thinks their teeth may provide an answer. He believes Diplodocus's narrow teeth suggest that they grazed on vegetation close the ground. Teeth that were narrow would have helped them to not swallow dirt picked up along with the vegetation. With Diplodocus only eating plants down low, Camarasaurus would have had plenty of food up high. That way, there was enough for everyone. Paul Sereno, a University of Chicago paleontologist who also studies sauropods, believes D’Emic is right. “Last night I had a salad that I grew in my own yard. And I really had to wash the lettuce carefully, because there’s this grit in it,” said Sereno. “It’s exactly what we’re talking about. You put your muzzle down to the ground and you’re going to be [taking in] these sand grits that wear your teeth down.” And if your teeth get worn down quickly, it helps to have a lot of spares.