New research shows that some plant-eating dinosaurs ate shellfish. Think dinosaurs had a boring diet? Think again. Researchers studying fossilized dinosaur feces from about 75 million years ago have discovered that at least some plant-eating dinosaurs also snacked on shellfish.  Scientists have discovered crustacean remains in dinosaur droppings. Such findings reveal that large plant-eating dinosaurs such as hadrosaurs may have had far more complex eating habits than we usually give them credit for. “We need to refine our presumptions about dinosaur diets,” said lead author Karen Chin, a paleontologist at the University of Colorado in Boulder. Scientists studying the creatures of the past typically look at the bones these animals left behind. While bones reveal a lot about an animal's shape, they do not present much information on how an animal actually interacted with its environment. A prime example of this would be how that animal fit into its ecosystem’s complex food web. That’s why dinosaur poop is a paleontologist’s precious gem. When preserved in the right environmental conditions to become a fossil, it can reveal quite a bit about what a dinosaur was actually eating. Paleontologists even have a special word for fossilized poop: coprolites.  “Direct evidence for diet in the fossil record is very rare,” Chin said. “We are usually forced to rely simply on the bones, so we study the teeth and the jaw... So when we find coprolites like these … they do provide a different perspective on the diet.” These particular coprolites were discovered in southern Utah at the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument’s Kaiparowits Formation. They were dark — a sign that they had been filled with rotting wood. The researchers could tell that the wood had been rotting before the animals ate it. This meant that a tough material in the cell walls had been broken down by fungi. As the wood breaks down with the help of mushrooms, its complex sugars are released and can then be processed by animals. Though it might seem weird that a plant-eater would eat rotting tree bits, it’s not totally out of the question, Chin said. Similar wood-filled dinosaur dung had been found in Montana, too, about 1,000 miles or so away from the Utah site. An even stranger finding than the wood was the shellfish pieces. Researchers found fragments of what appeared to be crustacean shell in 10 of the 15 specimens they studied. They’re not sure exactly what species these crustaceans might be. One specimen full of crustacean bits could have been a fluke, but Chin and other researchers found the shell-filled dung over three different levels of rock. Each level of rock represents the passage of time. This means that the eating behavior persisted over time, perhaps very long periods of time. The scientists say the plant-eating dinosaurs were probably hadrosaurs, large duck-billed dinosaurs that ate plants and lived in the area. They had rows of teeth in their mouths. This unique trait allowed the plant-eaters to chomp through wood and even shells, too. Why would these animals eat crustaceans? Chin’s hypothesis is this: Herbivores couldn't rely on rotting wood year-round because there wouldn’t be enough of it to go around, so the rotting wood was probably an occasional meal. She wondered whether the crustaceans were eaten along with the rotting wood during breeding season, when the dinosaurs would need all the extra calcium and protein they could get to lay their eggs. This idea might be similar to some bird behavior, dinosaurs’ only living descendants. Chin pointed out that some seed-eating birds look for insects when it comes time to lay eggs, probably seeking out the extra proteins and minerals. If that’s the case for these dinosaurs, then their eating habits may have been far more complex than previously thought, Chin said. Of course, it’s nearly impossible to discern the animals’ intentions. Were the crustaceans eaten by accident or by choice? Chin points out that the shelled animals were probably at least 5 centimeters. They were big enough that a hadrosaur would have noticed and could have spit them out if it wanted, just as ducks spit out bits of food they decide aren’t worth eating. Jordan Mallon, a paleontologist at the Canadian Museum of Nature in Ottawa who was not involved in the research, said he didn’t think the dinosaurs were intentionally eating the crustaceans. In all likelihood, the crustaceans were an unintentional addition to the meal. Plenty of ocean animals today end up with all kinds of plastic or other man-made debris in their guts, Mallon pointed out. “Yes, animals can be selective, but you don’t have to look very long to find counter-examples in the world today,” he said. Just because shell and wood were found in the same droppings does not mean they were part of the same meal, Mallon said. They could have been eaten at separate times. Both are tough materials that take time to digest and so might have ended up making their exit together. Regardless, he added, the findings highlight how important it is to continue digging into dinosaur droppings. “I think what she’s been showing is that these fossilized blobs of poo are worth looking at a little further,” Mallon said of Chin and her work. “I think it’s showing that there’s some interesting things to be found in there; that we bear to learn a lot from looking at them.”