Dinosaurs in trouble before asteroid hit When a giant asteroid slammed into Earth 65 million years ago, it caused huge waves, earthquakes, fires and dust storms that blocked the sun. It also led to the end of the dinosaurs. But what if the asteroid had glided safely past our planet? Would dinosaurs still be walking among us today? New studies say the answer is probably not. Instead, scientists have found evidence that dinosaurs were dying out even before the asteroid hit. They began to slowly disappear 40 million years before that. Different types of dinosaurs were vanishing faster than new types of dinosaurs were emerging, scientists said. The Chicxulub asteroid that smashed into the Earth only made it tougher for dinosaurs to exist. British scientists Manabu Sakamoto and Chris Venditti are convinced the asteroid killed off the dinosaurs. But they believe the dinosaurs were beginning to struggle and to slowly disappear long before the asteroid hit. For years, scientists have debated whether dinosaurs were becoming extinct before the asteroid struck. They have tried to answer the question by studying different kinds of fossils. Fossils are traces or prints in rocks of animals or plants from long ago. The British scientists had a different plan. They looked at how fast new types of dinosaurs came into being. They also studied how fast existing types of dinosaurs seemed to disappear. New groups of dinosaurs began to slow a very long time ago. Scientists believe that occurred between 48 million and 53 million years before the asteroid event. They are not sure what caused the slowdown. They do have a few ideas, however. They explain that the Cretaceous Period (145.5 million to 65.5 million years ago) was a time of big changes on Earth. The global climate was cooling. Many volcanoes were erupting, and the continents were breaking apart. Any of those events — or some of them working together — could have affected the dinosaurs, the scientists said. Another new study looked at mammals. At the time, they were just small, rodent-like creatures. But they might have begun to compete for some of the same food and water dinosaurs wanted. Sakamoto and Venditti say the new study shows that mammals were on the rise on Earth before the asteroid struck. They believe the mammal study supports their own findings on the disappearance of the dinosaurs.