Dogs process language like humans Your dog understands you more than you think. Scientists in the Eastern European country of Hungary published a new study. It found dogs understand both the meaning of words and the tone of voice used to speak them. Let's say someone tells a dog he's going to the vet. The person uses an excited tone, or style, of voice, hoping to trick the dog into thinking it's going to be fun. However, the pup isn't fooled. He still understands he's going to the vet, even if the person tries to trick him. Scientists already knew that dogs understand human voices better than wolves, who are related to dogs. Dogs can be directed by human speech. They are also able to match hundreds of objects to words.  But the new findings mean dogs are more like humans than was previously known. According to a paper published in Science magazine, dogs process language using the same regions of the brain as people. ## How The Study Worked Scientists at a university in Budapest, Hungary, led the study. They brought in 13 family dogs. Mostly, the dogs were golden retrievers and border collies. The researchers, or scientists, trained the dogs to sit still for seven minutes in a scanner. The scanner measured the dogs' brain activity. The pups were free to roam around and leave the scanner at any time, the researchers said. A female trainer the dogs recognized then spoke common words of praise, such as "that's it," "clever" and "well done." She also spoke words such as "yet" and "if," which were neutral — that is, neither good nor bad. Researchers believed these neutral words were meaningless to the animals. Then, the dogs listened to each word. Each word was spoken in either a neutral tone of voice or a happy, motivational tone. Using the brain activity images, the researchers saw that the dogs processed the familiar words regardless of the tone of voice. They processed them using the left hemisphere, or region, of the brain, just like humans. Meanwhile, the dogs interpret the tone of voice in the sound-related regions of the right hemisphere. It is the same way that people interpret tones, the study said. Dogs have a "rewards center" in their brains. It gets activated by pleasant things such as petting and food. The dogs' reward centers bounced excitedly when positive, or cheery, words were also spoken in a positive tone. ## Dogs Understand Both Words And Tone The study shows that when someone praises a dog, it understands. Still, it's best to use both praising words and a cheery tone of voice, the researchers said. Dogs can not only tell apart what we say and how we say it. They can also combine, or join, the two, said one researcher. Humans trained dogs and made them domesticated at least 15,000 years ago. The researchers said it's unlikely that domesticating dogs led them to understand and process human language in this way. Instead, they say, it's probably far more ancient. That means we humans aren't as special as we like to think. Dogs can process language just like us. However, humans learned to use words. That's what distinguishes people from dogs and other animals.