Dogs process language like humans Your dog gets you. He knows what you're saying. At least, that is what some scientists are now saying. Scientists in Hungary, a country in Eastern Europe, have published a groundbreaking study. They found that dogs understand both the meaning of words and the intonation, or tone of voice, used to speak them.  Let's say you tell your dog he's going to the vet. You use an excited tone of voice, hoping to trick him into thinking it's going to be fun. As it turns out, your pup isn't fooled. It doesn't matter how you say it, he still knows exactly where he's going, and he's sad about it. ## Dogs Are A Lot Like Humans It had already been established that dogs respond to human voices better than wolves, which are related to dogs. Dogs can be directed by human speech. They are also able to match hundreds of objects to words. But the new findings mean dogs are more like humans than was previously known. According to a paper published in Science magazine, dogs process language using the same regions of the brain as people.  Attila Andics and other scientists at a university in Budapest, Hungary, led the study. They brought in 13 family dogs, mostly golden retrievers and border collies. The researchers trained the dogs to sit totally still for seven minutes in an fMRI scanner, which measured their brain activity. (The pups were free to roam around and leave the scanner at any time, the authors said.) A female trainer familiar to the dogs then spoke common words of praise, such as "that's it," "clever" and "well done." She also used neutral words such as "yet" and "if." Researchers believed these neutral words were meaningless to the animals. Each dog heard each word in both a neutral tone and a happy, motivational tone. ## Processing Words And Analyzing Tone Using the brain activity images, the researchers saw that the dogs processed the familiar words regardless of tone of voice. They processed them using the left hemisphere, just like humans. Meanwhile, the dogs analyzed the tone of voice in the the auditory, or ear-related, regions of the right hemisphere. That's exactly how people analyze tones, the study said. Dogs have a "rewards center" in their brains. This area is triggered by pleasant things such as being petted, getting food and embracing a mate. The dogs' reward centers bounced excitedly when positive words were spoken in a positive tone. It shows that for dogs, it can help to praise them, but it's best that you use both praise words and a cheery tone of voice, Andics said. "So dogs not only tell apart what we say and how we say it, but they can also combine the two." ## An Ancient Skill Humans domesticated dogs — that is, made them pets inside homes — at least 15,000 years ago. The researchers said it's unlikely that domesticating dogs led them to understand and process human language in this way. Instead, they say, it's probably far more ancient. That means we humans aren't as special as we like to think, at least when it comes to how our brains deal with language. What makes words uniquely human, Andics said, is that we came up with the idea of using them.