Researchers are looking into how dogs pick up on social cues from humans around them. It may tell us something about childhood development. HARTFORD, Conn. — Porter the dog is trying to figure out why his owner has placed a toy bone under a bucket. His response may tell us something about human development and various learning disabilities. That’s the hope of Laurie Santos, who runs the Canine Cognition Center at Yale University, which opened in December. She pointed to the 4-year-old chocolate Labrador mix, brought in by one of her students. Porter is growing up in the same kind of environment as human children, Santos said. For that reason, comparing how he learns with the way people learn can tell us a lot about human development. “So much more than primates, dogs are more cued into what we care about and what we know,” Santos said. “And they might have been shaped in a way that’s very different from any other animal species in part because, in a sense, they behave more like a human child who’s cued in (to humans) than, say, a chimpanzee.” For all that we ask of dogs — loyalty, companionship, slipper-fetching — rarely have we asked what drives dogs. That’s now starting to change as more scientists realize just how interesting dogs are. The Canine Cognition Center is the latest example of that growing interest in dogs and in what they can tell us about ourselves. Santos and her researchers there study dogs’ decision-making processes and look at how they pick up on social cues from the humans around them. Santos is a professor of psychology — the study of the human mind. She is internationally known for her research on monkeys, who have long been considered good subjects for psychologists because of their similarity to humans. Although she still studies monkeys, Santos said dogs may offer something to her research that monkeys can’t. “More and more, we’re learning that, although monkeys" are "closely related to us, the environment they’re in and the way they’re raised is completely different,” she said. “So it would be great to get a new model that experiences some of same environments.” That, said Santos, is where dogs come in. “They don’t have language and, obviously, they’re not human, yet they grow up in exactly the same environments as children and rely on some of the same kinds of cues,” she said. “So the question is, given that they have similar environments, what does that tell us" about the way they learn and understand? Another benefit to studying dogs is practicality. Monkeys and other animal subjects have to be housed somewhere — but with the Canine Cognition Center, people bring in their dogs for tests and then bring them home. After a dog is enrolled with the center, the researchers contact the owners about coming studies they might be suited for. Studies typically last 30 to 45 minutes, and none is more than an hour. Owners can watch their dogs take part in the studies, which generally involve simple problem-solving games. Santos said they have about 300 dogs signed up, and 40 dogs enrolled in the studies. Dogs are required to be spayed or neutered, so they can't make puppies. They must be vaccinated against sicknesses and in good health. And they must not be mean-tempered. Those that are accepted receive a letter of admission — with the same wording as letters sent to high school students admitted to Yale. Dogs have been studied in the past, the most famous example being Ivan Pavlov’s work with salivating dogs near the turn of the 20th century. Pavlov found that dogs would salivate or drool when they see people, even if the people didn't have food. His studies found that dogs learned to associate humans with food. The first wave of dog behavior studies peaked in the 1960s, but declined over the rest of the 20th century. Now in the 21st century dog studies are picking up again. The difference between recent studies of dogs and earlier ones is the motivation behind the studies. Earlier research tended to use dogs as a convenient test subject, without being much interested in the dogs themselves. Only recently have researchers taken up dog behavior studies simply because we’re curious about how dogs’ minds work. “I think recently, that animals — dogs and cats — are seen more as persons in our home," said Erica Feuerbacher, who is studying dogs at the University of Florida. "I think we’re realizing how incredibly adaptive they are.” In other words, we're only now beginning to understand how extraordinarily good they are at adjusting to human environments. That’s not by accident, said Brian Hare, who teaches anthropology at Duke University and studies how the relationship between humans and dogs has evolved throughout history. “In a word it’s because of domestication,” he said. “Dogs have been selected not to be smarter in the way we normally think about it; they’ve been selected to be emotionally smarter. They like humans and they want to be with humans more than they want to be with other dogs. They really see us emotionally as partners.” Beyond learning about human development, there are also plenty of other good reasons to study dogs. “We share a long history with dogs, and dogs" have "all sorts of jobs in the real world,” Hare said. Their many duties, he said, include serving as guide dogs, detecting bombs and drugs and finding cancers in people. “They’re busy people,” Hare said of dogs. “Everything we learn about them helps us identify the best dogs for those jobs.” In general, Santos said, dogs have a lot to tell us. For centuries, she said, dogs have had to get along with humans to get their food and other resources, so it would make sense that they’re in tune with us emotionally.