Scientists watch as Porter's owner puts a toy bone under a bucket. They want to see the dog's reaction, and what he does next. It may tell us something about how humans learn. HARTFORD, Conn. — Porter the dog is trying to figure something out: Why has his owner placed a toy bone under a bucket? The way he acts may tell us something about how humans learn. That’s the hope of scientist Laurie Santos. She runs the Canine Cognition Center at Yale University. "Canine cognition" is just a fancy way of saying "dog thinking." Santos pointed to the 4-year-old chocolate Labrador mix. Porter is growing up in the same kind of setting as human children, Santos said. For that reason, it's interesting to compare how he learns with the way people learn. Doing so may tell us a lot about how humans develop. Humans are closely related to monkeys. So, scientists often study them to see how they're like us. But, unlike monkeys, dogs live with us. For that reason they are tuned into "what we care about," Santos said. They behave much more like a human child than, say, a chimpanzee does. Santos studies the way dogs make decisions. She also looks at how dogs react to cues, or signals, from the humans around them. Often these are cues people don't know that they're giving. For example, a dog may sense that we are angry. If he thinks we're angry, he may stop what he's doing. Santos is a professor of psychology — the study of the human mind. She is well known for her studies of monkey behavior. Monkeys have been studied by psychologists for many years. This is because they are our closest animal relatives. Santos still studies monkeys. But she now feels that dogs offer her something monkeys can’t. Monkeys are "closely related to us," she said. However, they way they live and "the way they’re raised is completely different.” It is very helpful, she said, to look at animals that live with people. That is where dogs come in. Dogs, Santos said, have a lot to tell us. For centuries, dogs have had to get along with humans to get food and other things they need. So they’ve become very good at picking up what we're feeling. “They grow up in exactly the same" setting as children, she said. They "rely on some of the same kinds of cues.” Dogs and children may live in the same setting — but they don't act the same way. What, Santos asks, does that tell us about the way dogs learn and understand? How is the way they think different from how children think? Besides the fact that dogs live with people, there's another reason to study them: It's just plain easier to study dogs than monkeys. Monkeys have to be kept somewhere. With dogs, people bring in their pets for tests and then bring them home afterward. Studies typically last 30 to 45 minutes. Owners can watch their dogs take part in the studies. Usually, the dogs play simple problem-solving games. Santos said she has about 300 dogs signed up. Right now, 40 dogs are taking part in the studies. Learning more about ourselves is not the only reason to study dogs. There are other practical reasons. Dogs have all sorts of jobs in the human world. These include serving as guide dogs and sniffing for bombs and drugs. Dogs are even used to sniff out diseases like cancer. “They’re busy people,” scientist Brian Hare said of dogs. The new studies will help us pick "the best dogs for those jobs.”