Like humans, dogs may have episodic memory. Dogs can remember commands and tricks, but can they remember events the way humans do?  Recalling an experience, or episode, is an episodic memory. These life memories — tied to places, times and feelings — are important to us as humans.  There are other types of memory. For example, your phone number or each state’s capital city are semantic memories. They are memories for facts that build over time. However, as described in the words of the famous musician Bob Dylan’s song "Precious Memories," episodic memories are the ones that “flood the soul.” This means episodic memories are ones that make us feel more emotion when we remember them.  Could a dog remember and recall memories of experiences as people do? Researchers conducted a recent study on whether other animals besides humans share the ability for episodic-like memory. Their results were published in a science journal called "Current Biology."  Claudia Fugazza is an animal behavior researcher in Budapest, Hungary. The first task for her and her research group was to design a memory test. The test would target episodic memory by ruling out a dependence on learning. Learning taps into semantic memory. Memory researchers agree that a key part of episodic memory is how the memories are saved. They must be stored without the knowledge that they will need to be remembered in the future. So, any test of episodic memory has to be unexpected. For their study, the research group in Budapest enlisted the help of 17 pet dogs. Dogs happily work with humans. It makes them a particularly well-suited species to test the range and evolution of thinking abilities. Evolution is the process by which types of life have developed over many, many years. The dogs in this study were excited participants who were all easily trained to imitate a simple action, such as looking into a bucket. They were given the command “do it.” Previous research had already established dogs could remember such actions after a delay. In order to test episodic memory specifically, researchers had to make sure that the dogs wouldn’t expect to imitate their owner's actions. The solution was to provide an alternative expectation. Now, immediately after watching their owners perform a series of actions, the dogs were given the command "lie down." Replacing dogs’ expectation to imitate with lying down was important for the memory test, which had to be unexpected. The researchers tried to show dogs’ new expectation to lie down in two ways.  First, they received training until they would lie down immediately after observing the actions. It was one indication they were indeed expecting the “lie down” command to follow. A second suggestion that dogs were expecting a "lie down" request was if they acted surprised when they didn’t get one. Like humans and other animals, when dogs see something unexpected they register their surprise by looking at it longer. Next came the unexpected — “do it” — episodic memory test. Instead of the now expected “lie down,” one minute after dogs saw the last action they instead got the command to imitate. First, they did seem surprised, looking longer at their owners than previously. Then, nose to the umbrella, paw on the chair, the majority of the dogs imitated their owner’s action.  To see if they would still remember the action after a longer delay, the dogs left the testing area for an hour. Then they came back for a second imitation request. Again, many dogs successfully imitated the action they had seen. However, there were fewer than after the one-minute test or compared with a previous study where dogs were expecting to imitate. These results further support the idea that dogs were probably using episodic memory. For people, episodic memory also fades more quickly than other types of long-term memory. The study is one of a handful suggesting episodic-like memory in animals. They add to our growing knowledge of the richness of other animals’ mental lives. The dog cognition lab in Budapest is one of many around the world. Pups in Connecticut can be involved at Yale University. Dogs in North Carolina can help out at Duke University. Their studies all work to help us understand how dogs, and humans too, think about and process the world.  Dogs have been our partners for hundreds of years. They share our homes and our work. Now we know they might share some of the rich memories of our lives together.