Like humans, dogs may have episodic memory. Dogs can remember tricks, but can they remember things that happen?  Remembering an event is called an episodic memory. These life memories are tied to places, times and feelings. They are important to people.  There are other kinds of memory. Your phone number or the states' names are semantic memories. They are memories from learning. Episodic memories are about things that happen. Could a dog have memories of events just like people do? Scientists did a study to find out. They wanted to know if animals besides people can have those memories.  Claudia Fugazza studies animals in Budapest, Hungary. The first job for her and her study group was to make a memory test. The test would be for episodic memory. It would rule out anything about learning.   Scientists say that a key to episodic memory is how memories are saved in the mind. They must be saved without someone knowing that they need to remember them. This means that these memories come back as a surprise. A test of episodic memory has to be a surprise. The study group got the help of 17 pet dogs. Dogs happily work with people. It makes them good animals to test the evolution of thinking power. Evolution is an idea, or theory, about how life has developed over the years. The dogs in the study were trained to follow a simple act. They did whatever their owner did. An example of an act would be looking into a bucket. They were told to “do it.”  Then they had to make the dogs expect something else. After watching their owners perform some acts, the dogs were told to "lie down." They did not do what their owners did that time. It was the surprise part. Then they were told to “do it.” It was the episodic memory test. First, they seemed surprised. They looked longer at their owners than earlier. Then, most of the dogs did what their owners did.  The study is one of a few that say animals might have episodic memory. The dog lab in Budapest is one of many around the world. Pups in Connecticut can go to Yale University. Dogs in North Carolina can help out at Duke University. Their studies help us understand how dogs, and people, think.  Dogs have been our friends for many years. They share our homes and our work. Now we know they might share some of our memories.