Like humans, dogs may have episodic memory. Dogs can remember tricks, but can they remember events the way people do?  Remembering an experience is called an episodic memory. Such life memories are tied to places, times and feelings. They are important to people.  There are other types of memory. For example, your phone number or each state’s capital are semantic memories. They are memories for facts. However, episodic memories are the ones that people laugh about and write songs about. Could a dog have episodic memories like people do? Scientists did a study on whether animals besides humans can have episodic-like memory. Their results were published in a science journal.  Claudia Fugazza studies animals in Budapest, Hungary. The first job for her and her study group was to make a memory test. The test would target episodic memory. It would rule out anything involving learning. Learning uses semantic memory.  People who study memory agree that a key to episodic memory is how memories are saved. They must be stored without the knowledge that they will need to be remembered later. A test of episodic memory has to be a surprise. The study group in Budapest got the help of 17 pet dogs. Dogs happily work with humans. It makes them a good type of animal to test the evolution of thinking power. Evolution is an idea, or theory, about how life has developed over the years. The dogs in the study were pets who were easily trained to imitate a simple action. The action might be looking into a bucket or touching an umbrella. They were given the command “do it.”  Earlier studies had shown dogs could remember such actions later. To test episodic memory, the scientists had to make sure that the dogs would not expect to imitate the actions. They had to make the dogs expect something else. Now, after watching their owners perform some actions, the dogs got the command "lie down." Making the dogs expect something other than to imitate by lying down was important for the test. It had to be a surprise. The scientists tried to show the dogs a new expectation to lie down in two ways.  First, they received training until they would lie down right after seeing the actions. It was one sign they were expecting the “lie down” command. A second sign that dogs were expecting a "lie down" command was if they acted surprised when they did not get one. When dogs see something that surprises them, they look at it longer. Next came the “do it” command. It was the episodic memory test. Instead of the expected “lie down,” after dogs saw the last action they instead got the command to imitate. First, they did seem surprised, looking longer at their owners than earlier. Then, nose to an umbrella, paw on the chair, most of the dogs imitated their owner’s actions.  To see if they would remember the action after a longer time, the dogs left the testing area for an hour. Then they came back for a second command to imitate. Again, many dogs imitated the action they had seen.  The study is one of a handful suggesting episodic-like memory in animals. The dog lab in Budapest is one of many around the world. Pups in Connecticut can be involved at Yale University. Dogs in North Carolina can help out at Duke University. Their studies help us understand how dogs, and humans, think about the world.  Dogs have been our partners for many years. They share our homes and our work. Now we know they might share some of our memories.