Like humans, dogs may have episodic memory. Dogs can remember commands and skills, but do they remember specific events the way humans do?  Recalling an experience, or episode, is an episodic memory. Such autobiographical memories — tied to specific places, times and emotions — are vital to our lives as humans. There are other types of memory. For example, your phone number or each state’s capital city are semantic memories — memories for facts that build over time. Episodic memories are different. As perfectly described in the lyrics of musician Bob Dylan’s song "Precious Memories," episodic memories are the ones that “flood the soul.” The question for researchers in a recent study published in "Current Biology" is whether other animals besides humans share the ability for episodic-like memory. Could a dog remember and recall memories of experiences as people do?  Claudia Fugazza is an animal behavior researcher at Eotvos Lorand University in Budapest, Hungary. The first task for her and her associates was to design a memory test. The test would target episodic memory by ruling out reliance on learning, which would instead tap into semantic memory. Memory researchers agree that a key aspect of episodic memory is that memories are saved without the knowledge that they have to be remembered in the future. So, any test of episodic memory has to be unexpected. For their study, the research group in Budapest enlisted the help of 17 pet dogs. Dogs are a particularly well-suited species to test the range and evolution of thinking abilities because they happily work with humans.  The dogs in this study were energetic participants who were all easily trained to imitate a simple action, such as looking into a bucket or touching an umbrella with the command “do it.” Previous research had already established dogs could remember such actions after a delay. So to guarantee a test of episodic memory specifically, researchers had to make sure that the dogs wouldn’t expect to imitate the demonstrated actions. The solution was to provide an alternative expectation. Now, immediately after watching their owners perform a series of actions, the dogs were given the command "lie down." Replacing dogs’ expectation to imitate with lying down was important for the memory test, which had to be unexpected. The researchers tried to confirm dogs’ new expectation to lie down in two ways. First, they received training until they would reliably lie down immediately after observing the actions. It was one indication they were indeed expecting the “lie down” command to follow. A second suggestion that dogs were indeed expecting a "lie down" request was if they acted surprised when they didn’t get one. Like humans and other animals, when dogs see something unexpected they register their surprise by looking at it longer. Next came the unexpected — “do it” — episodic memory test. Instead of the now- expected “lie down,” one minute after dogs saw the last action they instead got the command to imitate. First, they did seem surprised, looking longer at their owners than previously. Then, nose to the umbrella, paw on the chair, the majority of the dogs imitated their owner’s action.  To see if they would still remember the action after a longer delay, the dogs left the testing area for an hour before coming back for a second imitation request. Again, many dogs successfully imitated the action they had seen, though fewer than after the one-minute test or compared with a previous study where dogs were expecting to imitate. These results further support the idea that dogs were probably using episodic memory. For people, episodic memory also fades more quickly than other types of long-term memory. These results, one of a handful suggesting episodic-like memory in a non-human species, add to our growing knowledge of the richness of other animals’ mental lives. The dog cognition lab in Budapest is one of many around the world. Pups in Connecticut can participate at Yale University and dogs in North Carolina can help out at Duke University. Their studies all strive to help us understand how dogs, and humans too, think about and process the world.  Dogs have been our partners for centuries. They share our homes and our work, and now we know they might share some of the rich memories of our lives together.