Dogs were first domesticated during the ice age in Europe, according to the study. But some dispute those findings as a dogfight of a debate continues over when and where it happened. LOS ANGELES – Since the time of Charles Darwin, the father of evolution, scientists have argued over the origin of domesticated dogs. But recently, this one has become a major dogfight. Some experts believe our ancestors in the Middle East and elsewhere were drawn to small, furry wolf pups. They took in the pups as novelties. Other experts say they were raised as a source of meat in early agricultural societies in Asia. Yet another theory says that bands of hunters used the early dogs as helpers. This was long before people ever figured out how to domesticate goats and sheep. Goats and sheep were the first species tamed for agriculture. Now, thanks to faster and cheaper DNA sequencing technology, the argument over what sparked the Big Bark may finally be solved. DNA sequencing gives information about the exact genetic structure of a creature and helps scientists trace how a species evolved. According to a recent study in the journal Science, evolutionary biologists have concluded that dogs were first domesticated most likely in ice age Europe 18,800 to 32,100 years ago. That's much earlier, and much farther north, than previously believed. The discovery came after biologists analyzed the mitochondrial DNA of 18 ancient dogs and wolves. They then compared this with the mitochondrial DNA of modern dogs and wolves. Mitochondria are the tiny parts of a cell that make energy. The study's authors wrote that dogs evolved from a now extinct species of European wolf. This wolf species, which died out long ago, followed bands of humans hunting woolly mammoths and other large animals. Initially, the wolves sought out dead animals and scraps of meat left behind by the hunters. Over time the wolves began to hang around people. People probably kept their distance from wolves at first, since the wolves were large and aggressive, said Robert Wayne. He is an evolutionary biologist at the University of California, Los Angeles. Evolutionary biologists study how life evolved on earth from simple life forms to much more complex ones. Wayne is the study's main author. Eventually, though, wolves entered the human community. They may have helped hunters locate prey or kept other animals from getting in the way of the hunt, Wayne said. Domesticated dogs spread. However, the European wolf that got the ball rolling left no living descendants other than dogs. Modern day wolves are not the ancestor of dogs, said Wayne. Until recently, many archaeologists and biologists believed that dogs were domesticated less than 13,000 years ago, either in eastern Asia or the Middle East. One key find was a burial site in Israel. It contained the 12,000-year-old skeleton of an elderly man cradling a puppy. This shows the unique bond between dogs and humans. Tracing the exact path of dog evolution has been extremely difficult. Ancient dog bones are hard to tell apart from wolf bones. Frequent interbreeding between dogs and wolves further complicates matters. In fact, Charles Darwin, who died in 1882, believed that the huge variety of dog breeds meant that dogs must have had more than one ancestor. Genetic researchers today say this probably is not the case. They think domesticated dogs evolved from one ancestor, in one region. "On some levels, understanding the geographic origins of dogs is definitely more difficult than studying humans," said Greger Larson. He is a bioarchaeologist at Britain's Durham University. Bioarchaeologists study animal bones from archaeological sites. Larson said Wayne and the other authors had "significantly advanced" the debate on domestication. "I really like this paper," Larson said. The origin of dogs has been hard to pin down. "There have always been crazy ideas about the process and the location." There are those, however, who argue that Wayne is barking up the wrong genetic tree. Peter Savolainen is a professor of evolutionary genetics at Sweden's Royal Institute of Technology. He said there is evidence that dogs were first domesticated in China, probably as a source of food. Savolainen pointed out that Wayne and his co-authors published a paper in 2010 citing the Middle East as the origin of domestic dog. They have now abandoned this view. The study's authors said they hoped to confirm their findings with additional testing of genetic material from ancient cells. This is expected to provide more information. In the meantime, experts are thinking about this latest theory and why scientists feel so strongly about it. "People make up tremendously elaborate stories about the origin of our own species based on a few fossil remains here and there," said James Serpell. He is a professor at the University of Pennsylvania. "I guess we're doing the same thing now to our dogs. We view them as members of our families and we want to know where they came from and how this relationship came about."