Dolphins at rest: "Do not disturb" WAIANAE, Hawaii — Allison Alterman likes to swim for exercise in the ocean near her home on Hawaii's Big Island. Sometimes she'll see spinner dolphins gliding or jumping nearby. If the dolphins stick around, tour boats will always show up, sometimes 20 at a time. The boats drop off passengers with floats in the water for a swim. For many of these people, it's a chance to realize a long-held dream. For the dolphins, however, they "come into the shore to rest and it doesn't seem like they're able to do that because they're surrounded," Alterman said. Scientists are concerned that the intense interest is harming the animals, because they're nocturnal and need to rest after nights spent foraging for food. Now the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), a government agency that takes care of the oceans, is preparing to suggest rules to help protect the dolphins. The agency could ban swimming with Hawaii spinner dolphins or prohibit people from entering shallow bays when the animals are resting. "Disturbing their resting behaviors can actually affect their long-term health and the health of the population," said Ann Garrett. She's an administrator with the National Marine Fisheries Service, which is a part of NOAA, and she works to protect marine animals in the Pacific Islands. Garrett said the agency plans to propose rules in June. The regulations could affect more than 200 dolphin-related businesses in Hawaii, as well as swimmers and other ocean users. Claudia Merrill, the co-owner of a business called Dolphin Discoveries on the Big Island, said she would welcome some rules, especially if they stop people from swimming with dolphins from late morning to midafternoon. That's when dolphins get most of their rest. Merrill also said that tour guides must be taught to understand when dolphins are settling into their rest state. One key indication is when a pod of dolphins swim and dive in synchrony, or together. "It should be a sustainable industry. It can be a sustainable industry," Merrill said. Her business is in Kailua-Kona, a town on the Big Island. Some operators in Kona follow guidelines made by local tours, which include avoiding four dolphin resting areas between 10 a.m. and 2 p.m. But Merrill said only a few of the tour operators she knows about follow the guidelines. Garrett said her agency has heard reports of vessels chasing down pods at high speed and corralling the dolphins into an area. Hawaii's spinner dolphins feast on fish and small crustaceans that pop up from the ocean's depths at night. When the sun rises, the dolphins head for shallow bays to hide from tiger sharks and other predators. To the untrained eye, the dolphins appear to be awake during the day because they're swimming. But these marine mammals sleep by resting only half of their brains at a time, keeping the other half awake to surface and breathe. Even when they're maneuvering through the water, they may be sleeping. Julian Tyne, a researcher at Australia's Murdoch University, said spinner dolphins off the Big Island were exposed to human interaction about 80 percent of the time over the three years he studied them from 7 a.m. to 6 p.m. Sometimes people would come interact with them every 10 minutes, he said. Tyne said he doesn't know whether this human interaction is changing dolphin behavior. But he said the animals may not be resting as much as they need to, which could harm their ability to look for food at night and their ability to reproduce. The fisheries service first said it would consider regulations in 2005, after the tour business had grown rapidly in the previous decade. But instead of proposing rules, officials have helped fund research to better understand spinner dolphins. They also promoted a program that discouraged people from swimming with the animals. But the guidelines have done little to stop or change dolphin swim tours. The Marine Mammal Protection Act prohibits harassing dolphins, but it's not clear whether swimming with them is allowed. In the past, federal authorities have prosecuted tour guides for feeding bottlenose dolphins in Florida. But dolphin feeding has never been a problem in Hawaii. Jennifer Hall, a musician from Chicago, recently visited Hawaii. She went on a tour early in the morning in Waianae, an hour's drive from Honolulu, on the island of Oahu. She was with about 10 other people on her tour. They jumped in the water to see dolphins swim back and forth, surfacing and diving down to the ocean floor about 20 to 25 feet below. Some tourists attempted to swim after the dolphins, but guides held them back, saying they should "observe not disturb." Their boat, together with about five other boats, formed a large semicircle around the animals. Hall said she felt like she shared with the dolphins the serenity and calm of being in the water. Her partner Noam Wallenberg, a songwriter, said it was "mind-blowing" and "vastly different" from seeing animals in a zoo. "Being with creatures of the ocean right there and seeing them in their natural habitat was really wonderful. So beautiful," she said.