Captive dolphins long held at the National Aquarium in Baltimore will move to a new ocean sanctuary MIAMI, Fla. — Eight dolphins will be moved to a safe ocean sanctuary after spending their lives swimming in tanks. They are retiring from the National Aquarium in Baltimore, Maryland. The aquarium announced plans to move its dolphins into a sealed-off ocean space by the end of 2020\.   People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) welcomed the news. Additionally, the CEO of the Humane Society of the United States blogged that the aquarium "has done something terribly important." "There's no model anywhere, that we're aware of, for this," aquarium CEO John Racanelli told The Associated Press. "We're pioneering here, and we know it's neither the easiest nor the cheapest option." SeaWorld recently announced a partnership with the Humane Society after ending its orca breeding program. However, they staunchly rejected calls to release its whales and dolphins. The aquarium's Atlantic bottlenose dolphins will not simply be released into open seas. They will be given a large, closed-off space in the ocean. The exact size of the space has not been released, but Racanelli said it will be measured in acres, not square feet – meaning it will be quite large.  Possible sites in the Florida Keys and the Caribbean have been explored. The sanctuary will have a full-time staff and "excellent water quality" in a mild climate. It will also have isolation pools for medical care or refuge from harmful conditions. They will also have barriers to stop breeding among the dolphins or mingling with wild dolphins, Racanelli said. Only the oldest dolphin in the group has ever swum in ocean water. She is a female who was captured in 1972\. Six dolphins were born at the aquarium and one was born at SeaWorld in Orlando. Ranging in age from 7 to 44, the dolphins stopped performing scheduled shows in 2012\. They still remain on display in 25-year-old tanks. "We've learned a lot, obviously, about how to take care of them, about how to ensure that they thrive," Racanelli said. "As that learning evolution has continued, it's become clear to us we can go even further in terms of their health and welfare by taking this kind of step." The aquarium had considered other options for its dolphins for several years, thanks to growing public distaste for live animal shows. These included moving them to other aquariums or renovating their tanks. Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus sped up the retirement of its touring elephants, moving them to a Florida refuge. This was prompted by growing scrutiny and concerns about the way they treat their animals. For similar reasons, SeaWorld recently decided to phase out its signature animal, the orca. This choice followed years of declining attendance, entertainers refusing to perform and the loss of a marketing partnership with Southwest Airlines. The park had originally planned to build larger tanks for the orcas, but this had not been enough to stop public protests. Three animal advocacy groups have announced a joint plan to create a safe seaside space for captive orcas, belugas and dolphins. Until the Baltimore aquarium's announcement Tuesday, scientific institutions keeping marine mammals have argued against these "sea pens." These people say that such efforts fail, and that these sanctuaries have actually harmed the animals.  The National Aquarium is a member of the Association of Zoos and Aquariums. This means they make decisions "appropriate for the animals" in their care, according to the association's acting president and CEO, Kris Vehrs. She said the aquarium will work with state and federal agencies as it relocates the dolphins. Humane Society CEO Wayne Pacelle said Racanelli's plans are "more evidence" that aquariums are adapting to shifts in public opinion and prioritizing the animals' well-being. SeaWorld officials, however, believe their animals are safest in their current displays. The park also argues that their animals help educate the public about protecting wildlife. "Sea cages for our whales are high risk," SeaWorld spokeswoman Aimee Jeansonne Becka said in an email. Racanelli said the National Aquarium's dolphins will remain in human care throughout their lives in their new environment. Initial costs for building the sanctuary depend on seaside land values. However, the costs of dolphin care should be lower in ocean waters that do not need to be regulated like an aquarium tank, Racanelli said. Decisions about whether researchers and guests can visit the sanctuary will come later. The National Aquarium recently lost $1.9 million because of a brief closure of the marine mammal area. In 2011, it suffered bad publicity after the deaths of two newborn dolphins. A new dolphin program was launched with higher general admission prices. The aquarium made almost $10 million more in 2014 than in 2013 before its profits dipped last year, according to reports.