Captive dolphins long held at the National Aquarium in Baltimore will move to a new ocean sanctuary MIAMI, Fla. — Eight dolphins will soon get to swim in the ocean. They have lived their whole lives in Baltimore's National Aquarium. The Maryland aquarium plans to move them to a closed ocean pen.  This has never been done before. The aquarium plans to have them in a safe seaside space before 2020. Many groups that help animals are happy about the plan. John Racanelli is in charge of the National Aquarium. He said he knows that the move will be hard and will cost more money. He still thinks the move is important. The dolphins will not just be set free. They will be given a closed-off space in the ocean. The size of the space has not been decided. Racanelli said it will be very large.  The ocean pen will have full-time workers. It will also have clean water. The dolphins will have pools they can use to hide in, or to get help from vets. Fences will protect them from wild dolphins. Only the oldest dolphin has ever been in the ocean. The rest were born in human care.  Rancanelli said the aquarium workers now know more about caring for dolphins. They think the ocean pen is a great next step.  Many other places are changing their treatment of animals. For example, SeaWorld stopped breeding orca whales. They are famous for their orcas. They are changing because people worried about how animals are treated. Three animal rights groups plan to make an ocean pen. The pen will be for animals like dolphins. Some people who care for animals were against ocean pens. They argued that these pens can harm the animals.  Other groups will make sure the dolphins are moved safely. The government will work with them as well. The dolphins will be cared for by humans for the rest of their lives.    SeaWorld will not be moving any of their animals. They believe their animals are safest where they are now. They also think they help teach people about wild animals. The aquarium is not sure how much the new pens will cost. The costs of dolphin care should be lower in ocean waters. Racanelli is not sure if people will be allowed to visit.