Dolphins at rest: "Do not disturb" WAIANAE, Hawaii — Allison Alterman lives on Hawaii's Big Island. She likes to swim in the ocean, and sometimes she sees spinner dolphins swimming nearby. Spinner dolphins are a small dolphin species. They love to show off and leap from the water.  When the dolphins stay in one place, tour boats show up. The boats drop off passengers in the water for a swim. For many of these people, swimming with dolphins is an amazing experience. However, Alterman said that's a problem for the dolphins. The animals can't rest "because they're surrounded." Scientists are worried that these people are bothering the dolphins. Like some other creatures, these dolphins are active at night, and spend the day resting. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) is part of the U.S. government. It takes care of the oceans. The group wants new rules to help protect the dolphins. It could make a rule against swimming with dolphins. Or it could tell people they are not allowed to get close to the dolphins when they are resting. Ann Garrett works at NOAA. She said that boats sometimes chase dolphins and get in their way. Bothering the dolphins can be harmful to their health, said Garrett.  Garrett said new rules could affect companies that use boats to take customers to see dolphins. It is already against the law to bother dolphins. Claudia Merrill works at a company called Dolphin Discoveries. The company takes people to see dolphins. Merrill said new rules would be a good idea. People should not be allowed to swim with dolphins during parts of the day, she said. Sometimes the dolphins look like they are awake, because they are swimming. However, these animals are special. They sleep by resting only half of their brains at a time. The other half stays awake so that the dolphin can come up to the surface to breathe. Even when dolphins are gliding through the water, they may actually be sleeping. Hawaii's dolphins eat fish and small crabs in the early morning. Later in the morning, they go to shallow bays to hide from sharks and other predators. A bay is an area of ocean water surrounded by land on every side except for one. Julian Tyne is a scientist who lives in Australia. He studied dolphins near Hawaii for three years. Tyne said the dolphins had humans near them most of the time. Tyne said he doesn't know whether this problem is changing how dolphins live. He said it could be bad for them. Jennifer Hall lives in Chicago, Illinois. When she visited Hawaii, she went on a tour early one morning. The tourists jumped in the water. They wanted to see dolphins swim and dive down to the ocean floor. Some tourists tried to follow the dolphins, but the guides stopped them and said they should "observe not disturb." Their boat was together with about five other tour boats. The boats made a big half-circle around the animals. Hall said she felt the same peacefulness that the dolphins did. Her friend Noam Wallenberg said it was "vastly different" from seeing animals in a zoo. "Being with creatures of the ocean right there and seeing them in their natural habitat was really wonderful. So beautiful," she said.