Huge hunts put dolphins in danger For many years, fishermen in the Solomon Islands have been using a form of fishing called drive hunting. Groups of hunters on canoes go far offshore and clap stones together to round up dolphins. Now, researchers are worried about how many dolphins are being killed for their meat and teeth. The researchers studied hunting records and talked to local residents. They say more than 15,000 dolphins were killed in just one village's hunts between 1976 and 2013. The Solomon Islands is an independent country made up of a chain of more than 900 islands in the South Pacific, located north of Australia. It has a native population that goes back almost 3,000 years. During World War II, the islands were the site of the worst fighting between the Japanese and U.S. armies, including a famous battle at Guadalcanal. Dolphin hunting has a long history in the Solomon Islands, for reasons that are as much cultural as financial. For the people on the Solomon Islands, it's long been about the teeth. Necklaces made of dolphin teeth are "bride prizes" that young men give to their future wives as an engagement present. Dolphin meat is also sold for cash. Jewelry made of dolphin teeth has popped up in markets in the country's capital city, Honiara, and its value is rising. Over the past decade, the price of dolphin teeth has risen to five times what they were worth before. Each tooth is worth about 70 U.S. cents and as they go up in price, their value gives hunters a bigger incentive. The strong commercial market for teeth is troubling, said Scott Baker, a researcher who is one of the study's authors. As the traditional hunt gains in value, it can put the dolphin population in danger, said Baker. He is also the associate director of the Marine Mammal Institute at Oregon State University. The study looked at one village where drive hunting is popular. The village, Fanalei, suspended its regular hunt in 2010 as part of a deal with an international group and received cash as an incentive to stop the hunt. But the deal broke down in 2013 and hunting began again. Local news reports of new hunts reported that hundreds of dolphins were killed. That attracted the attention of researchers, who started a fact-finding mission to figure out the effect of the hunts. What they found was troubling: during just the first three months of 2013, the Fanalei villagers killed at least 1,674 dolphins. Most of them were spotted dolphins, but the fishermen also killed spinner dolphins and bottlenose dolphins. The number of dolphins killed was more than those killed in 2013 during the famous Taiji hunt in Japan. The Taiji hunt was filmed for a documentary called "The Cove," which inspired activists to take action. The Fanalei hunt was large, said Baker. The number of dolphins killed was big enough to make researchers worry that the dolphin population would shrink, he said. The researchers say their findings show that there is a need to regulate such hunts. The International Whaling Commission protects large whales, but not small marine mammals such as dolphins. Baker said dolphin hunting around the world is increasing. Many fishermen are selling dolphin meat instead of the fish they used to catch because the fishing grounds have been harmed by pollution and overfishing. Like farmers in developing countries who sell wild animals as "bushmeat," instead of cattle, the fishermen are selling dolphins as "marine bushmeat." Baker said fishermen picking up marine mammals in their nets along with the other fish had been a problem for decades, and now, those "by-catches" are a big issue. It appears the dolphins are becoming a target for fishing, he said. "We do see the Solomon Islands as a warning flag of what might be a larger pattern in developing countries," Baker said.