Huge hunts put dolphins in danger Fishermen in the Solomon Islands are used to hunting dolphins for their meat and teeth. More than 900 islands make up the country of the Solomon Islands. It is in the Pacific Ocean, near Australia. People who live in the Solomon Islands have a tradition of hunting dolphins. They make necklaces out of dolphin teeth, which are then used as prizes that young men give to their future wives. Dolphin meat is also sold for money. Each dolphin tooth is worth about 70 cents in American money. It is worth much more to the people in the Solomon Islands. Prices have also gone up a lot in the past 10 years. Hunters want to make money, so they hunt as many dolphins as they can. Fishermen in the islands use a form of fishing called drive hunting. Groups of hunters on canoes clap stones together. The clacking sound gathers the dolphins so the hunters can kill them. Scientists are worried that too many dolphins are being hunted. They decided to start keeping track of the dolphins being killed. They looked at hunting records and talked to local residents for a study. The scientists found out that in only one village, more than 15,000 dolphins were killed between 1976 and 2013. The strong sales of teeth are a worry, said Scott Baker. He helped write the study. As dolphin teeth become more valuable, the dolphins are in worse danger, he said. The study looked at one village called Fanalei, where the hunt was popular. The village made a deal in 2010 with an international group. The group gave them money to keep them from hunting the dolphins. Then, in 2013 the deal broke down and hunting began again. The local newspapers reported that hundreds of dolphins were killed in the new hunts. The numbers the newspapers listed got the attention of scientists, who decided to figure out what sort of effect the hunts had on the dolphin population. What they found was troubling. During just the first three months of 2013, the villagers killed at least 1,674 dolphins. Most of them were spotted dolphins, but the fishermen also killed spinner dolphins and bottlenose dolphins. Even more dolphins were killed in that hunt than during the famous Taiji hunt in Japan. The Taiji hunt was filmed for the documentary, "The Cove." The hunt in Fanalei was large, Baker said. So many dolphins were killed that scientists worried that they were in danger of disappearing, he said. The scientists said this shows that hunting should be regulated. The International Whaling Commission protects whales, but it does not look after small marine mammals such as dolphins. Baker said dolphin hunting around the world is growing. Many fishermen have turned to dolphins. They catch them when they cannot find the fish they used to catch because of pollution and overfishing. Often, fishermen accidentally pick up marine mammals in their nets along with the fish they are trying to catch. This has been a problem for decades. But now the accidental catches are a big issue, Baker said. It seems like the fishermen have begun targeting dolphins instead of the regular fish.