Captive dolphins long held at the National Aquarium in Baltimore will move to a new ocean sanctuary MIAMI, Fla. — After spending their lives swimming in tanks in Baltimore's National Aquarium, eight dolphins will be moved to a seaside sanctuary.  With this decision, the Maryland aquarium will sail into uncharted waters for the marine mammal industry. The aquarium plans to move its dolphins into the ocean enclosure by the end of 2020.  People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) welcomed the news. In addition, the CEO of the Humane Society of the United States blogged that the CEO at the aquarium, John Racanelli, "has done something terribly important." "There's no model anywhere, that we're aware of, for this," Racanelli told The Associated Press in an interview ahead of Tuesday's announcement. "We're pioneering here, and we know it's neither the easiest nor the cheapest option." SeaWorld, however, sharply rejected calls to release its whales and dolphins. The aquatic theme park recently announced a partnership with the Humane Society after ending its orca breeding program. The Baltimore aquarium's Atlantic bottlenose dolphins will not simply be released into open seas. Officials have not said how large the enclosed sanctuary will be, but Racanelli said it will be measured in acres, not square feet. Potential sites in the Florida Keys and the Caribbean have been explored. The sanctuary will have a full-time staff and "excellent water quality" in a temperate climate. It will also have isolation pools for medical care or temporary refuge from harmful conditions. There will also be barriers to stop breeding among the dolphins or mingling with wild dolphins, Racanelli said. Only the oldest dolphin in the group has ever swum in ocean water. She is a female captured in 1972\. Six were born at the aquarium and one was born at SeaWorld in Orlando. Ranging in age from 7 to 44, they stopped performing scheduled shows in 2012\. They still remain on display in 25-year-old facilities. "We've learned a lot, obviously, about how to take care of them, about how to ensure that they thrive," Racanelli said. "As that learning evolution has continued, it's become clear to us we can go even further in terms of their health and welfare by taking this kind of step." The aquarium has considered new options for its dolphins for several years amid growing public distaste for live animal shows. Suggestions included moving them to other institutions or renovating their tanks. Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus sped up the retirement of its touring elephants, moving them to a Florida refuge. This was prompted by growing concerns over animal cruelty. SeaWorld's decision to phase out its signature animal, the orca, followed years of declining attendance, entertainers refusing to perform and the loss of a marketing partnership with Southwest Airlines. SeaWorld also faced protests that continued through now-abandoned plans to build larger tanks for its orcas. Three animal advocacy groups have announced a joint plan to create a seaside sanctuary for captive orcas, belugas and dolphins. One of the advocacy groups is the leader of a campaign to reduce the number of dolphins caught in tuna nets. They also campaigned for the release of the whale that starred in "Free Willy." Until the Baltimore aquarium's announcement Tuesday, institutions keeping marine mammals have argued against "sea pens" or other sanctuaries. Critics say these efforts fail or harm the animals. Members of the Association of Zoos and Aquariums make decisions "appropriate for the animals" in their care. The National Aquarium will work with state and federal agencies as it relocates the dolphins according to the association's temporary president and CEO, Kris Vehrs. Humane Society CEO Wayne Pacelle said Racanelli's plans are "more evidence that animal-based facilities" are adapting to cultural shifts and prioritizing the animals' well-being. SeaWorld officials, however, believe their animals are safest in their current displays and help educate the public about protecting the marine mammals' peers in the wild. "Sea cages for our whales are high risk," SeaWorld spokeswoman Aimee Jeansonne Becka said in an email. Racanelli said the National Aquarium's dolphins will remain in human care throughout their lives in the new sanctuary. Initial costs for building the sanctuary depend on seaside land values. However, the costs of dolphin care should be lower in ocean waters that do not need to be regulated like an aquarium tank, Racanelli said. Decisions about access for researchers and visitors will come later. A brief closure of the marine mammal facility and negative publicity after the 2011 deaths of two newborn dolphins lost the aquarium $1.9 million, according to an internal document. The aquarium launched an informal dolphin program with higher general admission fees. Its revenue grew from $45.9 million that year to $53.5 million in 2014 before dipping last year, according to its annual reports.