The taming of the fox No matter what, foxes may always be wild. Even if it is just a little bit. These fluffy animals are shown as clever and smart.  They are also shown as untamable. Foxes would make bad pets. At least, that is what people thought. Then a scientist changed everything. The scientist's test started 60 years ago. His name was Dmitry Belyaev. He was studying genetics in Siberia, which is an area of Russia. ## When Did Dogs First Become Friendly? Genetics is the study of genes. All living things have genes. Genes decide features, like eye color. Belyaev wanted to know how dogs first became friendly toward people. So, Belyaev and other scientists decided to study foxes.  They picked foxes because they are almost the same as dogs in many ways. Belyaev’s team knew wild foxes could be friendly. They thought it happened over time. They guessed that parents passed this feature to their children. So, the scientists raised foxes that were not friendly to people. This showed a fox’s features could be tied to genetics. ## Foxes That Behave Like Pet Dogs Today, there is a large, growing group of domesticated foxes. These foxes are not afraid of people. They even want to be near people, just like a pet dog.  The most friendly foxes are called “elite." As the elite foxes grew up, they had babies of their own.  Then, these foxes grew up and had babies. This continued on and on.  Each time new baby foxes were born, more of them were elite. ## Curly Tails And Floppy Ears Scientists found that the friendly foxes look different than wild foxes. The friendly foxes have spots in their fur. They also have curled tails. Their ears are floppy for longer when they are babies. And, just one gene does not cause foxes to be friendly. If the friendly and not friendly foxes have babies, there are many new features. Five of these friendly foxes live at an education center near San Diego. There, people can see them up close. ## Watch Your Coffee Around Boris There is a fox there named Boris. Boris acts just like dogs do toward people. “He wants to be scratched and if you don’t scratch him, he’ll make you,” said David Bassett. He is president of the center. Many states don't even allow foxes to be pets.  Even if they are friendly, they are sneaky, said Amy Bassett. She started the center.  If she is not looking, Boris will pee in her coffee cup.