The taming of the fox Around the globe, foxes are considered to be forever wild.  In both ancient fables and big-budget movies, these fluffy animals are depicted as being clever, intelligent and untamable. Untamable, that is, until an experiment in Russia's Siberian region that started almost 60 years ago. Back then, Dmitry Belyaev was studying genetics during a very dangerous time in the Soviet Union. This was a country formed out of a few nations, such as Ukraine, the Czech Republic and Russia, which broke apart in the early nineties. Soviet officials tried to actively prevent genetic research. To stop their research, hundreds of biologists were thrown in prison or executed. ## Belyaev Tests His Belief About Domestication After Soviet leader Joseph Stalin’s death in 1953, the government’s grasp on genetic research loosened. Belyaev was finally able to test a belief he had been secretly studying. Belyaev was curious about how dogs first became domesticated, or turned into pets. As the head of a new genetics institute, Belyaev decided to replicate the early days of domestication.  He picked foxes for the experiment because of their similarities to dogs. His research team purchased the tamest wild foxes they could find. They figured this would speed up the pace of domestication. Belyaev’s team wanted to prove the foxes’ friendly behavior was the result of genetic selection. Genetic selection is when characteristics become more common over time. ## Proving That Behavior Is Tied To Genetics So, the researchers began to breed foxes that showed opposite characteristics of the tame pups. Instead of being outgoing and excited around people, these foxes were defensive and aggressive. This showed certain parts of the fox’s behavior could be tied to genetics. Unfortunately, Belyaev died before seeing the final results of the study. But today, 58 years after the start of the program, there is now a large, sustainable population of domesticated foxes. These animals have no fear of humans, and actively seek out human companionship. The most friendly are known as “elite” foxes. “By the tenth generation, 18 percent of fox pups were elite; by the 20th, the figure had reached 35 percent,” Lyudmilla Trut, one of the researchers, wrote in a paper describing the experiment in 1999\. “Today, elite foxes make up 70 to 80 percent of our experimentally selected population.” University of Illinois biologist Anna Kukekova has been studying these domesticated foxes since the late 1990s. Her lab looks at the genes of the friendly characteristics in the animals. Genes control characteristics. They are passed from parents to their children. ## Friendly Foxes Have Different Physical Characteristics One of the lab’s most interesting findings is that the friendly foxes show physical characteristics not seen in the wild. Examples are spots in their fur and curled tails.  Their ears show weird characteristics, too. Like puppies, young foxes have floppy ears. But the ears of domesticated foxes stay floppier for a longer time after birth, said Jennifer Johnson, who is a biologist. She has worked with Kukekova since the early 2000s. The researchers found there isn’t just one gene responsible for the friendly behavior. “When these [tame and aggressive] animals are bred, we see a lot of interesting new behaviors,” Johnson said. After the Soviet Union broke apart, the domesticated fox experiment fell on hard times. The researchers realized that keeping more than 300 foxes is expensive. Now, the lab’s primary source of money is selling the foxes to people and groups worldwide. One customer is the Judith A. Bassett Canid Education and Conservation Center near San Diego. The center keeps five domesticated foxes so that people can get an up-close view of them. ## Born To Be Wild “We have a fox whose name is Boris, and as soon as someone walks in, he’ll run up to them like a dog will,” said David Bassett, president of the Conservation Center. “He wants to be scratched and if you don’t scratch him, he’ll make you.” Want a domesticated fox of your own? Remember these rules. First, bringing one into the United States costs almost $9,000\. Several states don't allow people to keep foxes as pets. And, while domesticated foxes are friendlier than those in the wild, they can still be unpredictable. Turning away for a second from a fox is risky. You do so, then realize, "Boris came up here and peed in my coffee cup,’” said Amy Bassett, the Canid Conservation Center’s founder.  You can easily train and manage behavioral problems in dogs. But, there are a lot of behaviors in foxes that will never be managed, Bassett added.