The taming of the fox Foxes, even the tame ones, are considered wild. In stories and in movies, these fluffy animals are shown as clever, intelligent and untamable.  Untamable, that is, until an experiment that started 60 years ago. Dmitry Belyaev was studying genetics in Siberia, which is a region in Russia. Genetics is the study of genes. All living things have genes and they determine characteristics, such as eye color. Back then, it was a very dangerous time in the Soviet Union. This was a group of nations that included Russia. The Soviet Union broke apart in the early 1990s. When the Soviet Union existed, its government officials wanted to stop genetic research. Hundreds of biologists were thrown in prison or even killed. ## How Did Dogs First Become Pets? In 1953, Soviet leader Joseph Stalin died and Belyaev was finally able to test what he had been secretly studying. Belyaev was curious about how dogs first became domesticated, or made into pets. As the head of a new genetics center, Belyaev decided to try to recreate the early days of domestication.  He picked foxes for the experiment because of their similarities to dogs. His team of scientists purchased the tamest wild foxes they could find. They thought this would speed up the pace of domestication. Belyaev’s team wanted to prove the foxes’ friendly behavior was the result of genetic selection. Genetic selection is when characteristics become more common over time. Genes are passed from parents to their children. So, the scientists began to breed foxes that showed opposite characteristics of the tame pups. The foxes weren't outgoing or excited around people. This showed certain parts of a fox’s behavior could be tied to genetics. ## Elite Foxes Are Just As Friendly As Pet Dogs Today, there is a large, growing population of domesticated foxes. Unfortunately, Belyaev died before seeing the final results of the study.  These foxes have no fear of humans. They even seek out human companionship, like a pet dog would. The most friendly foxes are called “elite.” As the elite foxes grew up, they had babies of their own. Then, these foxes grew up and had babies. This continued on and on. Each time new baby foxes were born, more and more of them were elite. Scientists found that the friendly foxes show physical features not seen in the wild. Examples are spots in their fur and curled tails. Their ears are different, too. Like puppies, young foxes have floppy ears. But the ears of domesticated foxes stay floppier for a longer time. Scientists also found there isn’t just one gene responsible for the friendly behavior. When the friendly and not friendly foxes are bred, there are a lot of new behaviors. ## A Pet Fox Might Not Be The Best Idea After the Soviet Union broke apart, the domesticated fox experiment fell on hard times. There wasn't enough money to keep the study going. Now, the lab sells the foxes. One of its customers is an education center near San Diego. The center has five domesticated foxes for people to get an up-close view. “We have a fox whose name is Boris, and as soon as someone walks in, he’ll run up to them like a dog will,” said David Bassett, president of the center. “He wants to be scratched and if you don’t scratch him, he’ll make you.” Would you like a fox as a pet? Bringing one to the United States costs almost $9,000\. Several states don't even allow people to keep foxes as pets. And, they can still be sneaky. Turning away for a second from a fox is risky, said Amy Bassett, who started the center. You do and then realize, "Boris came up here and peed in my coffee cup.”  You can easily train and manage behavioral problems in dogs. But, there are a lot of behaviors in foxes that will never be managed, Bassett added.