Dogs' DNA shows East Asia origins When did dogs and humans start living together? Where did the first dogs come from? When were the first dogs born? A new study tries to answer these questions by looking at dogs' DNA. DNA is a code found in nearly all living organisms. In humans and animals, for example, it contains the information that tells the body how to grow and work. It is the body's instruction manual. DNA is passed on from parents to children. DNA also contains clues about an animal's history. That is how scientists were able to use DNA to figure out where dogs came from. The new study was published on Dec. 15. It was carried out by scientists from China, Canada, Finland, Singapore, and the U.S. The scientists looked at the DNA of dogs all over the world. Different dogs have slightly different DNA. These differences give scientists an idea of which dogs are related to each other. When they put all of their information together, they get a map of how dogs changed over the years, going all the way back to the original dogs.  According to the study, the first dogs lived in southern East Asia. The scientists learned this by looking at the DNA of the dogs that live in that area now, where they found two clues. First, there are many differences in the DNA of dogs in southern East Asia. For the scientists, this was a clue. Animals usually have more DNA differences in the areas where those animals first appeared.  Second, the scientists found that the DNA of dogs in southern East Asia looks like the DNA of gray wolves. All dogs, from huskies to Chihuahuas, are the descendants of wolves. Over the years, dogs moved to different places and their DNA changed. At first, though, there were not as many differences between dogs and wolves. The dogs in southern East Asia have DNA that looks like wolf DNA. This was another clue that the first dogs lived there. Scientists were also able to guess when the first dogs lived. According to their calculations, dogs split off from gray wolves about 33,000 years ago. Examining dogs' DNA was hard work for the scientists. There are so many kinds of dogs, all with different DNA and different histories. Dog DNA is especially complicated thanks to human beings. Since dogs began living with humans, humans started creating different dog breeds, changing their DNA. The new study answers many questions, but it raises some, too. For instance, what caused East Asian dogs to branch off from wolves in the first place? One possible explanation is that the wolves in that region became cut off from each other. A group of South Chinese wolves were then on their own. As these wolves had children, the DNA of the group slowly changed, and it did not mix with other wolves' DNA. Perhaps these South Chinese wolves eventually became dogs. After that, dogs became "man's best friend." On the other hand, it could have happened the other way around. It is possible that some wolves started living with humans before becoming dogs. Living with humans led to many changes for these wolves, and it could have changed their DNA. Maybe wolves became our friends and turned into dogs as a result. By studying DNA, scientists now have a much better understanding of the history of dogs. There is still much to learn, however. The story of exactly how dogs came to be remains a mystery.