Dogs' DNA shows East Asia origins Dog is man's best friend, or so the saying goes. For centuries, humans and dogs have shared a special relationship. There is still much we don't know about the origins of dogs, however. How they evolved, and how they earned a place in our hearts and homes, is not fully understood. An international study published this month in the journal Cell Research sheds new light on these questions by examining dogs' DNA. Passed down from parents to children, DNA is the code containing an animals' genes, the information that tells the body how to grow and work. The new study is one of the most extensive genetic investigations of dogs ever conducted. It was carried out by researchers from China, Canada, Finland, Singapore, Sweden and the U.S. Researchers examined the DNA of different breeds and dog populations from all over the world. Piecing together the genetic differences of different populations of dogs, they were able to reconstruct dogs' evolutionary history, which they traced all the way back to the first generation. For most species, the most genetic variation is found in the geographical area in which that species first emerged. Assuming that the same would be true of dogs, researchers searched for dog populations with high genetic diversity. They found that the DNA of dogs in southern East Asia is the most varied. From this, they concluded that dogs likely originated in that region. Researchers also found that dogs in southern East Asia exhibit the most genetic similarity to gray wolves, long believed to be dogs' closest wild ancestor. Then, after comparing the DNA of East Asian dogs and gray wolves, and accounting for the rate at which genetic changes occur, researchers were also able to estimate when dogs originated. According to their calculations, dogs split off from gray wolves roughly 33,000 years ago. From that starting point, they traveled far and wide. "The domestic dog, one of our closest companions in the animal kingdom, has followed us to every continent of the world," the study notes. About 15,000 years ago, groups of dogs migrated from southern East Asia to the Middle East, Africa and Europe. Researchers called the move a "global dispersal of dogs." One of the groups of dogs returned to northern China around 10,500 years ago before relocating to the Americas.  The study is the result of a massive effort on the part of researchers in six countries. Piecing together the history of the evolution of dogs was particularly hard given how genetically varied the animal is. "As a single species," the study notes, "the domestic dog embodies one of the largest collections of diversity for any species living on earth. Our study, for the first time, reveals the extraordinary journey that the domestic dog has traveled on this planet during the past 33,000 years." Dogs' DNA became especially complicated thanks to human beings. Humans have deliberately changed dogs' DNA by breeding them for specific purposes, thus creating different breeds. The researchers noted "dramatic" levels of genetic variation among dog breeds.  While the new study offers many answers, it also raises questions. For instance, what might have caused East Asian dog populations to genetically branch off from wolves in the first place? One possible explanation is that the wolves in the north and south in the region became cut off from each other. According to this theory, the genes of the South Chinese wolves gradually changed until, eventually, they became dogs. This would suggest that dogs became a separate species before they started living with humans. Domestication may not have occurred until after dogs spread out to different regions, about 15,000 years ago. On the other hand, it is also possible that domestication occurred before dogs split away from wolves. In fact, it may have been a cause of the new species' branching off. Associating with humans may have created a new environment for a group of wolves, leading them eventually to evolve into the first dogs. The study suggests that dog domestication may have been a long process that started when a group of wolves became loosely associated with humans. The wolves may have scavenged along with the humans, the study says.  The researchers' analysis of DNA provides new insight into the history of "man's best friend," but no archaeological evidence has yet been discovered to support their theories. Until then, the story of how, where, and when dogs evolved may remain mysterious.