Dogs' DNA shows East Asia origins Everyone knows that a dog is a man's best friend. Now, scientists are trying to learn more about this ancient bond. When did dogs and humans start living together? Where did the first dogs come from, and when did the species begin? A study published in Cell Research journal Tuesday Dec. 15 sheds new light on these questions by examining dogs' DNA. DNA is the code containing an animals' genes, the information that tells the body how to grow and work. DNA is passed from parents to children. The new study is one of the largest genetic studies of dogs ever conducted. It was carried out by researchers from China, Canada, Finland, Singapore, Sweden and the U.S. The researchers examined the DNA of dogs from all over the world. Piecing together the genetic differences of different populations of dogs, researchers were able to reconstruct dogs' history. They traced these genetic links all the way back to the first generation: a group of 4,600 dogs that lived about 33,000 years ago in southern East Asia. The researchers concluded that the first dogs lived in southern East Asia based on the DNA of the dogs that live there now. They noticed that their DNA is special in two ways: It has the most genetic diversity and is the most similar to the DNA of gray wolves, long believed to be dogs' closest wild ancestor. First, the researchers found that the DNA of southern East Asian dogs has the most variety. Scientists have noticed that, for most animal species, there is the most variety in DNA in the area where that species came from. Therefore, the researchers saw the variety in the DNA of southern East Asian dogs as a clue that the first dogs came from that area. Second, researchers found that the DNA of dogs in this area is similar to the DNA of gray wolves. All modern dogs, from huskies to Chihuahuas, are the descendants of wolves. The first dogs were genetically closest to wolves. When researchers found that the DNA of southern East Asia dogs is very similar to wolves' DNA, it was another clue that the first dogs lived in that region.  Researchers were also able to estimate when dogs emerged as a new species. According to their calculations, dogs split off from gray wolves about 33,000 years ago. In the years that followed, they traveled far and wide. "The domestic dog, one of our closest companions in the animal kingdom, has followed us to every continent of the world," the study notes. About 15,000 years ago, groups of dogs migrated from southern East Asia to the Middle East, Africa and Europe. Researchers called this migration a "global dispersal of dogs." One of the groups of dogs returned to northern China around 10,500 years ago. Then they moved again, this time to the Americas.  Getting a full understanding of dogs' genes required a huge effort. There are so many kinds of dogs, all with their own histories and distinct set of genes. "As a single species," the study notes, "the domestic dog embodies one of the largest collections of diversity for any species living on earth." Dogs' DNA is especially complicated thanks to human beings. For hundreds of years, humans have been breeding dogs for specific purposes. This created different breeds and altered dogs' genes. The researchers noted "dramatic" levels of genetic differences among dog breeds.  While the new study offers many answers, it also raises questions. For instance, what might have caused East Asian dog populations to genetically branch off from wolves in the first place? One possible explanation is that the wolves in the north and south regions became cut off from each other. According to this theory, the genes of the South Chinese wolves gradually changed until, eventually, they became dogs. This would suggest that dogs became a separate species before they started living with humans. Domestication may not have occurred until after dogs spread out to different regions, about 15,000 years ago. On the other hand, it is also possible that domestication occurred before dogs split away from wolves. In fact, it may have been a cause of the new species' branching off. Associating with humans may have created a new environment for a group of wolves, leading them eventually to become dogs. Dog domestication may have started from a group of wolves that became loosely associated with humans, the study proposes. That association might have begun when dogs scavenged with humans.  By studying DNA, researchers have come up with a new theory about the history of "man's best friend," but no archaeological evidence has yet been discovered to support it. Meanwhile, the story of exactly how, where, and when dogs evolved remains a mystery.