Zoos have not been very successful breeding captive elephants. Project Frozen Dumbo is a program that hopes to change that by collecting and freezing wild elephant sperm for zoos. PITTSBURGH — Over the last 10 years, 70 percent of Africa's wild elephant population has been killed off. The main cause is ivory poaching, in which elephants are slaughtered for their valuable tusks. At the same time, efforts to breed captive zoo elephants have not been very successful. Now, there is some good news. At zoos in Austria and England, two baby elephants were born using sperm from South African wild elephants. For the first time, elephant sperm gathered in the wild was frozen and given to zoos. Two female zoo elephants were artificially impregnated with the sperm and went on to deliver calves. The new project is known as Project Frozen Dumbo. It was launched by several international partners. Scientists had tried to use frozen elephant sperm in the past, but were not successful. The process is still experimental but considered to be promising by international elephant conservation groups. The new development came at a good time: Last Tuesday was World Elephant Day, which is held to draw attention to the wild elephant crisis. Project Frozen Dumbo is a partnership among several institutions: the Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research in Berlin, the Pittsburgh Zoo, the Vienna Zoo and ZooParc de Beauval in France. It grew out of discussions between two people: Barbara Baker, president of the Pittsburgh Zoo, and Thomas Hildebrandt of the Leibniz Institute. It was Hildebrandt who came up with the new method of freezing elephant sperm. The new process, Baker said, will help introduce fresh genetic material into the captive African elephant population's gene pool. Greater genetic diversity is essential if the zoo population is to remain healthy. It is now more likely, she said, that the captive elephant population can expand. In 2011, teams from the Pittsburgh Zoo and Leibniz Institute, including Baker and Hildebrandt, traveled to the Phinda Resource Reserve in South Africa. There, they helped wildlife researchers tranquilize and collect sperm from 15 wild bull elephants. The material was frozen using Hildebrandt’s process. The collected semen led to two successful births in Europe in 2013 and 2014. A third elephant is now pregnant at another zoo in England. “It’s monumental,” said Willie Theison, elephant program manager at the Pittsburgh Zoo. “Previous attempts at collecting and freezing (wild elephant) semen in the U.S. and Europe didn’t work. We were looking for a wide age group — they hand-picked specific bull elephants from 12 to 30 years old.” Frozen Dumbo has the support of elephant conservation groups, including the International Elephant Foundation. “This has been done in other species, but never before in elephants,” said the foundation’s director, Deborah Olson. Ivory poaching in Africa is fed by a strong demand for ivory trinkets in Asia. Together with rapid deforestation, poaching has caused the wild elephant population to drop drastically. It has gone from about 1.5 million in 2004 to between 300,000 and 400,000 animals. For about 30 years, international zoos have exchanged elephants as part of a breeding program. Those efforts have largely been unsuccessful. One of the few successful male elephants is the Pittsburgh Zoo’s Jackson. He is the father of several elephants throughout the United States. Jackson’s DNA, however, is “almost over-represented," said Theison — in other words, too many zoo elephants are his children. To be strong and healthy, the captive elephant population needs to have a lot of different DNA. DNA is what makes humans or animals different from each other. To survive a disease or to be able to change environments, animal and human populations need a lot of different kinds of DNA. They need many combinations of mothers and fathers. Using the semen from elephants overseas has been somewhat successful in the past. However, the cooled semen does not last long, and freezing had not previously worked. The best hope now, Theison said, is freezing samples from wild elephants and sending them to zoos all over the world. Project Frozen Dumbo has put the Pittsburgh Zoo near the head of the elephant conservation movement. The zoo participates in the 96 Elephants campaign. The goal of that nationwide campaign is to draw attention to a startling fact: an average of 96 wild elephants are poached every day. Theison said he hopes to pair a 14-year-old female with a possible mate this year. At the zoo’s 724-acre International Conservation Center in Pennsylvania, elephants roam relatively free, away from all but a few spectators. The hope is that such conditions will encourage natural breeding.