Zookeepers had hoped their captive elephants would mate. It hasn't quite worked out, so scientists went to South Africa counting on wild elephants to help with the process. PITTSBURGH — Over the last 10 years, more than a million of Africa's wild elephants have been killed. In 2004, there were 1.5 million wild African elephants. Today, there are only between 300,000 and 400,000 of the animals left. The biggest cause of their deaths is ivory poaching. Elephants are being slaughtered for their valuable ivory tusks. A strong demand for ivory in Asia keeps the poaching going even though it is against the law. An average of 96 wild elephants are poached every day. To make sure that elephants will not disappear altogether, zoos have been trying to breed captive elephants. Their efforts haven't been very successful, though. Getting elephants to mate and give birth is a tricky business. Now, there is good news. Two baby elephants have been born in zoos in Austria and England. It didn't happen the natural way, though. Scientists went to South Africa to visit wild elephants. They brought back semen, to fertilize female elephant eggs, and used it to make female zoo elephants pregnant in the United States. To keep the semen fresh, the scientists froze it. The female elephants went on to deliver healthy baby elephants. The new project is known as Project Frozen Dumbo. It is named after the Disney character Dumbo the Elephant. In the past, the scientists' experiment didn't work. But now, their success has come at just the right time. Last Tuesday was World Elephant Day, which is celebrated to draw attention to the problems of wild elephants. Willie Theison runs the Pittsburgh Zoo's elephant program. He said the news of the births was huge. For about 30 years, zoos have exchanged elephants to see if they could get them to have calves — or baby elephants. Those efforts have largely been unsuccessful. It's just not easy to get zoo elephants to mate. One of the few success stories is a bull elephant named Jackson who lives at the Pittsburgh Zoo. He has offspring all over the United States. Unfortunately, Jackson's success is itself a bit of a problem: Too many zoo elephants are his children. To be strong and healthy, the captive elephant population needs a wider pool of parents. Animals (and humans, too) carry DNA, which is given to them by their parents and makes every living thing unique. When too many animals have the same DNA, the group of animals becomes worse at surviving disease or changes in their environment. The best hope now, Theison said, is freezing semen from wild elephants. It can help create more diversity of DNA and be sent to zoos all over the world. Theison said he hopes to pair a 14-year-old female elephant with a possible mate this year. At his zoo, elephants roam over 724 acres, with few people bothering them. The hope is that such conditions will encourage natural breeding.