The elephant in the room Just 800 generations ago, if we took a summer vacation to Crete, Cyprus or Malta, we would have found familiar-looking islands, filled with the flowers and birds we can enjoy today. But bursting through the scrub would have been one surprise: a pygmy elephant, 1 meter high, and one of many different elephant species that once roamed every continent apart from Australia and Antarctica. The 20,000-year-old pygmy elephants take on a new pertinence today. They lived a blink of an eye ago in evolutionary time and shared the planet with modern humans. The fate of these lost elephants, warns professor Adrian Lister, a paleobiologist at the Natural History Museum, is analogous to the troubled future facing their close relatives, the African and Asian elephants threatened with obliteration today. “People are more likely to drive things to extinction on islands than on the mainland,” Lister says. “One of the problems with living elephants is not just that their numbers are going down and down, but that their populations are very fragmented.” When humans spread beyond Africa, they shared the planet with 42 species of terrestrial mammals weighing more than a ton. Now, only elephants, hippos and rhinos survive. The two contemporary elephant species are the last representatives of the megaherbivores who have played an enormous part in shaping life on Earth. Today’s elephants belong to a lineage stretching back 60 million years, members of the order of Proboscidea – spectacular trunked mammals.  Asking if Ross MacPhee has a favorite megaherbivore is “like asking me whether I love all my children,” says the curator and professor at the American Museum of Natural History. MacPhee studies extinction, and human species’ role in the disappearance of so many historic elephants, from the woolly mammoths to the older, shaggy-coated mastodons of North America, is a contentious subject. “Most people in my line of work agree that most of these losses were due to human actions – that humans intensively hunted these animals,” he says. But it wasn’t just Homo sapiens. Most pygmy elephants disappeared from Mediterranean islands before any evidence of human occupation and woolly mammoths in far North America disappeared before people turned up. This month, new research precisely dates the disappearance of woolly mammoth from St Paul’s Island, Alaska, at 5,600 years ago. They died of thirst – because rising seas shrank the island and reduced fresh water supplies. Humans didn’t reach St Paul’s until 1787. “People who don’t like the idea that humans did it all want to believe that it was climate change,” says MacPhee. “It wasn’t so much that climate change caused extinction as caused population collapses. Climate change kind of beat the crap out of these elephants. Finally humans showed up and wiped out whatever remained. I don’t personally believe that humans can have been responsible at all times and neither could the climate.” Today’s Asian elephant can be regarded as the oldest of the surviving Proboscideans, originating in Africa before the African elephant. “You could call it the original African elephant,” laughs Vivek Menon, chairman of the Asian Elephant Specialist Group. Across the world, and not just in Asia and Africa, elephants are celebrated in culture, a staple of stories for children, a rich and mighty symbol. “The elephant is a near person,” Menon says. “Its compassion, its memory – this is a remarkably intelligent beast. As a scientist, I know that elephants come very, very close to us.” What is less widely recognized in modern-day elephants is their talent for engineering or reshaping landscapes. Ecologists define elephants as a “keystone species,” without which ecosystems would be dramatically different. Just like their ancestors, African elephants disperse large quantities of seed over long distances. In Congo, scientists found forest elephants disperse 345 seeds per day from 96 species, typically more than 1 kilometer away from parent trees. They convert forest to scrub, damaging trees and opening up areas to smaller herbivores or sun-loving lizards, which has also been shown to help lions catch prey.  Being forced into smaller “islands” of protected land has caused elephants to damage some African woodlands. Zoologist Dr. Christopher O’Kane of Worcester College, Oxford, in England, says, “In a perfect world, the African elephant needs a lot more space than it has.” There are big differences among elephant species, but also big cultural differences in how they are viewed. In Asia there is a long tradition of taking Asian elephants into captivity and training them. The elephant-headed Hindu god Ganesh is, appropriately enough, a remover of obstacles. Elephants are prayed to every day. “It is extraordinarily helpful that our grandmothers taught us to revere the elephant,” Menon says. The biggest challenge in conserving the Asian elephant? “Land – nothing else,” Menon says. “There are 1.26 billion people in India and a large-bodied animal that needs to move.” Conservation scientists have identified 101 “corridors” in India along which elephants move between core habitat, where they can feed and breed. Elephants have tramped these routes for generations, but as they are blocked – by houses, roads, railways and other linear developments – human-elephant conflict arises.  Ultimately, scientists such as MacPhee and O’Kane say the elephant’s future will come down to numbers – of people, as well as elephants. The fossil record provides a dramatic picture of how the pygmy elephants, straight-tusked elephants, woolly mammoths and mastodons disappeared from the Northern Hemisphere as the last ice age ended. Now, the patterns are similar, Adrian Lister says. “What is really punishing these animals – global warming, pollution, habitat destruction – is a terrible synergy of different drivers, which is threatening biodiversity today.” Will the last members of the great elephant family survive? If they don’t, we only have ourselves to blame.