Elephants in the wild are being killed at an alarming rate. Wildlife researchers are now having success gathering wild elephant sperm and artificially inseminating captive cow elephants. PITTSBURGH — Over the last decade, some 70 percent of Africa's wild elephant population has been killed off due to ivory poaching. At the same time, efforts by zoos around the world to breed elephants in captivity have not been very successful. Both natural reproduction and artificial insemination have proven to be difficult. Now, there is some good news. At zoos in Austria and England, two baby elephants were artificially fathered with sperm gathered from South African wild elephants. For the first time, elephant genetic material gathered in the wild was frozen and used to artificially inseminate captive cow elephants that delivered calves. The project — known as Project Frozen Dumbo — was spearheaded by several international partners. In the past, attempts to freeze elephant semen samples for artificial insemination were not successful. The process is still experimental but considered promising by international elephant conservation groups. The new development came at a good time: Last Tuesday was World Elephant Day, which is celebrated to draw attention to the plight of wild elephants. Project Frozen Dumbo is a partnership among several institutions: the Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research in Berlin, the Pittsburgh Zoo, the Vienna Zoo and ZooParc de Beauval in France. It originated through discussions between Barbara Baker, president and CEO of the Pittsburgh Zoo, and Thomas Hildebrandt, a reproductive specialist at the Leibniz Institute. “The success of this procedure creates more opportunities to introduce new genetics into the African elephant population among zoos," Baker said in a statement. She said it will help to diversify the population, which will allow the elephants to survive and grow in the future. In 2011, teams from the Pittsburgh Zoo and Leibniz Institute, including Baker and Hildebrandt, traveled to the Phinda Resource Reserve in South Africa. They helped wildlife researchers tranquilize and collect sperm from 15 wild bull elephants. The material was frozen using Hildebrandt’s process, which led to the two successful births in Europe in 2013 and 2014. A third elephant inseminated through the process is now pregnant at another zoo in England. “It’s monumental,” said Willie Theison, elephant program manager at the Pittsburgh Zoo, who accompanied Baker on the African expedition. “Previous attempts at collecting and freezing (wild elephant) semen in the U.S. and Europe didn’t work. We were looking for a wide age group — they hand-picked specific bull elephants from 12 to 30 years old for our program.” Frozen Dumbo has the support of elephant conservation groups including the International Elephant Foundation. “This has been done in other species, but never before in elephants,” said the foundation’s executive director, Deborah Olson. Getting wild genetics into the international zoo population may be essential to the survival of the species, Theison said. With rapid deforestation in Africa and poachers profiting from a thriving Asian market for ivory trinkets, the wild elephant population has dropped drastically. It has gone from about 1.5 million in 2004 to between 300,000 and 400,000 animals. For about 30 years, international zoos have exchanged elephants in a largely unsuccessful breeding program. One of the few successful bull studs is the Pittsburgh Zoo’s Jackson, who has sired offspring throughout the United States. Jackson’s DNA, however, is “almost over-represented” among the captive elephant population, Theison said. Artificial insemination has been successful, but the cooled semen has a limited shelf life. The short-term solution to long-term elephant survival, he said, is to get fresh genes into the captive elephant DNA pool by freezing wild samples and sending them to zoos all over the world. Jackson’s abundant breeding and Baker’s leadership in Project Frozen Dumbo have put the Pittsburgh Zoo near the head of the elephant conservation movement. The zoo participates in the American Association of Zoos and Aquariums’ 96 Elephants campaign, which draws attention to a startling fact: 96 wild elephants are poached every day. Theison said he hopes to pair a 14-year-old female with a potential suitor this year. At the zoo’s 724-acre International Conservation Center in Somerset County, Pennsylvania, elephants roam relatively free with virtually no spectators in another attempt at encouraging natural breeding. Plans are underway for another Frozen Dumbo expedition, this time to collect and freeze elephant semen in Botswana.