The elephant in the room Just 800 generations ago, the islands of Crete, Cyprus or Malta would have looked familiar to us. They were filled with the flowers and birds we enjoy today. But bursting through the scrub would have been one surprise: a pygmy elephant. At just 1 meter high, the pygmy was one of many different elephant species that once roamed every continent apart from Australia and Antarctica. The 20,000-year-old pygmy elephants take on a new importance today. They lived for a short time and shared the planet with modern humans. Science professor Adrian Lister warns that the extinction of these elephants is similar to what we see today. Their close relatives, the African and Asian elephants, are struggling to survive.  When humans spread beyond Africa, they shared the planet with 42 species of land mammals that weighed more than a ton. Now, only elephants, hippos and rhinos survive. The two modern elephant species are the last representatives of the megaherbivores. These animals have played an enormous part in shaping life on Earth. Professor Ross MacPhee studies elephants. “Most people in my line of work agree that most of these losses were due to human actions,” he says.  “People who don’t like the idea that humans did it all want to believe that it was climate change,” MacPhee says. “It wasn’t so much that climate change caused extinction as caused population collapses. Climate change kind of beat the crap out of these elephants. Finally humans showed up and wiped out whatever remained.” Today’s Asian elephant can be regarded as the oldest of the surviving Proboscideans. “The elephant is a near person,” says Vivek Menon, an elephant specialist. “This is a remarkably intelligent beast. As a scientist, I know that elephants come very, very close to us.” Modern-day elephants have a talent for engineering or reshaping their land. Just like their ancestors, African elephants spread seeds over long distances. They turn forest to scrub, opening up areas to smaller herbivores or sun-loving lizards. Elephants have been forced onto smaller “islands” of protected land. This has caused the elephants to damage some African woodlands. Zoologist Dr. Christopher O’Kane says that “in a perfect world, the African elephant needs a lot more space than it has.” There are big differences among elephant species. There are also big cultural differences in how they are viewed. In Asia, there is a long tradition of training elephants. The elephant-headed Hindu god Ganesh is, appropriately enough, a remover of obstacles. People pray to elephants every day. “It is extraordinarily helpful that our grandmothers taught us to revere the elephant,” Menon says. The biggest challenge in conserving the Asian elephant? “Land, nothing else,” Menon says. “There are 1.26 billion people in India and a large-bodied animal that needs to move.” Scientists in India have identified 101 places where they can feed and breed. Elephants have traveled these routes for generations. Sometimes, they are blocked by houses and roads.  Scientists such as MacPhee and O’Kane say the elephant’s future will come down to the number of people and of elephants.  The fossil record shows how other megaherbivores disappeared as the last ice age ended. Now, the patterns are similar, Adrian Lister says. “What is really punishing these animals – global warming, pollution, habitat destruction – is a terrible synergy of different drivers, which is threatening biodiversity today.” Will the last members of the great elephant family survive? If they do not, we only have ourselves to blame.