Studies show snakes bite more people in Costa Rica during the hot and cold parts of the El Nino climate phenomenon. Scientists say this raises more red flags about climate change. A new study says some some types of weather can cause more snakebites. Scientists studied a climate pattern called El Nino. El Nino makes the weather change a lot. There are hot phases and cold phases. Scientists studied how many people got bitten by snakes during these phases. Scientists studied the number of snakebites in Costa Rica. There are people getting bit by snakes when El Nino causes hot weather, the study said. There are also more snakebites when El Nino makes the weather cold. The study said that poor people in areas far from cities are more likely to get bit. Luis Fernando Chaves wrote the report. He is an ecologist. He studies how living things get along in the environment. He says snakebites are a big problem. They do not get enough attention, Chaves said. About 2.5 million people around the world get snakebites each year. Around 1 out of 6 of those people gets very sick because of the snake bite. Snakes are coldblooded. The air around them controls their body temperature. Humans are warmblooded. Our bodies regulate their own temperature. Because snakes have to keep themselves warm, the weather affects them a lot. They might act very differently when it is warmer or colder outside. Scientists studied Costa Rica. It is a country in Central America. It was a good country to study for many reasons. There are a lot of snakes in Costa Rica. The government makes doctors keep track of who is bitten by snakes. Costa Rica is also in the right spot for weather changes. The changes are caused by El Nino. Scientists looked at snakebite information from 2005 through 2013. During that time, 6,424 snakebites were reported. There were more snakebites when El Nino caused hot weather. This is probably because snakes move around more in hot weather. They might wander farther as it gets warmer. They could run into people. Scientists found something else. There were also more snakebites when El Nino made the weather colder, too. This was a surprise. Still, scientists thought there could be a reason. They think snakes might have trouble finding food when it is cold. They may need to hunt further from home. Snakebites increased more in certain parts of Costa Rica. These were areas with poor people, Chaves said. The areas were far from cities.