Species of bee declared endangered in U.S. TRAVERSE CITY, Mich. — The rusty patched bumblebee is officially endangered. It is the first bee in the continental United States to be named endangered by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service. The bees have been dying in great numbers over the past 20 years, federal officials said Tuesday. The government agency said it would develop a plan to help rebuild the bee's population. It hopes to encourage people to provide more habitat for the bee and reduce the use of pesticides. Many of the steps needed to rescue the rusty patched bumblebee might also help other natural pollinators, such as struggling bees and monarch butterflies. Pollinators move pollen from one plant to another to help them grow and produce fruits and vegetables. Tom Melius from the Fish and Wildlife Service said pollinators are "small but mighty parts" of nature that sustain us and our world. "Without them, our forests, parks, meadows and shrublands, and the abundant life they support, cannot survive," he said. He also said losing pollinators would require humans to pollinate crops by hand. This process would be time-consuming and expensive, he said. The rusty patched bumblebee is notable for the rust-colored marking on its back. It buzzed across the East Coast and much of the Midwest in high numbers as recently as the 1990s. Today, only scattered populations remain in 13 states and the Canadian province of Ontario. The number of observed bee colonies has dropped by about 87 percent since the late 1990s. The crash happened so quickly that few researchers noticed until the damage was largely done. They're investigating a number of possible causes. These include disease, pesticide exposure, habitat loss and climate change. Researchers are also studying whether a drop in the population has made it harder for bees to find mates. The Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation is a non-profit organization in Portland, Oregon, that works to protect bees, butterflies and other pollinators. In 2013, it asked the government to list the rusty patched bumblebee as endangered. A year later, the society filed a lawsuit with the Natural Resources Defense Council, a non-profit environmental group. The Xerces Society demanded that the Fish and Wildlife Service take action. A settlement was reached that set a decision deadline.  The society previously said that bees probably were dying because of viruses spread by commercially raised bumblebees. These commercial bees are kept by people who sell honey and beeswax. The group also blamed widespread use of long-lasting insecticides, which are chemicals used to kill insects. "The Fish and Wildlife Service has relied upon the best available science and we welcome this decision," said Rich Hatfield, the society's senior conservation biologist. He said that efforts to save the rusty patched bumblebee will benefit more than just this one species. It will also help many other pollinators that are important to ecosystems and agriculture. Bees and other insects are key to billions of dollars' worth of crops in the United States each year. Their efforts benefit crops such as tomatoes, cranberries and peppers. Even plants that can pollinate on their own generate bigger fruit when bumblebees do the job instead. Bees are important to the natural food chain, too. They help with the growth of flowers and wild plants that produce fruits, seeds and nuts for animals to eat.    Fish and Wildlife Service biologists agreed there probably were overlapping reasons why bumblebees, honeybees and monarchs are dying. That raises concern for all 48 bumblebee species in North America. In September, the agency placed seven species of yellow-faced bees in Hawaii on the endangered list. They are the state's only native bees. The agency is also studying whether to list the monarch butterfly. The Endangered Species Act is a United States environmental law. It protects plants and animals that are at risk of disappearing. Officials said they would encourage landowners and local organizations to adopt "bee-friendly practices." Those practices include using native flowering plants in landscapes and planting flowers and trees that bloom from spring through fall. Another tactic is not using pesticides that harm bees. Listing the bee is "the best — and probably last — hope" for keeping it alive, said Rebecca Riley, a lawyer with the Natural Resources Defense Council.