World Conservation Congress in Hawaii reveals changes to endangered species list. HONOLULU, Hawaii — The world's largest living primate is in danger of going extinct. An animal species is said to be extinct when there are no more of its kind living in the world. The eastern gorilla has officially been listed as critically endangered. There are only 5,000 eastern gorillas left in the wild. There used to be nearly 17,000 gorillas. The International Union for the Conservation of Nature, or IUCN, is a group that fights to help protect animals in the wild. The group just released its Red List of Endangered Species. The list contains more than 80,000 species, or kinds of animals. Almost 24,000 of those are threatened with extinction. The IUCN said hunting is why the eastern gorilla is now "critically endangered." "To see the eastern gorilla — one of our closest cousins — slide toward extinction is truly distressing," Inger Andersen said. She is in charge of the IUCN. She added that her group's actions to save animals does work. Andersen said it is up to humans to "protect the future of our planet." Four of the world's seven great apes are now just one step away from extinction. There are several great ape species in the world, including the eastern gorilla, western gorilla, Bornean orangutan, Sumatran orangutan, chimpanzee, bonobo and — humans. Other than humans, only the chimpanzee and bonobo are not considered critically endangered. Still, they are listed as endangered. Most of the world's eastern gorillas live in central Africa, in a country called the Congo. Protecting the animals there will be tough because the country's government is shaky, said scientist Russell Mittermeier. He studies gorillas with the IUCN's primates group. Mittermeier said there are no easy fixes to the problem. He thinks the gorillas need protection on the ground. He added that once the area becomes safer, "ecotourism can take place." Ecotourism is an industry based on people who travel to a country to see the natural wildlife. The money people spend on their trips helps to support the countries they visit. Catherine Novelli is a government leader who studies the environment. She also blamed humans for the gorilla's declining population. Scientist Andrew Plumptre is glad the IUCN put the eastern gorilla on the critically endangered list. He said it will "bring attention" to the animals' suffering. "It has tended to be the neglected ape in Africa," even though it's the largest ape in the world, he said.  This week, the IUCN is hosting the World Conservation Congress. More than 9,000 officials from more than 180 countries are attending the meeting in Hawaii.  The IUCN's Red List is the most comprehensive study of endangered species. It guides government action around the world, said Cristian Samper. He is the president and CEO of the Wildlife Conservation Society. Other animals on the Red List are doing better than the apes. The giant panda was previously on the endangered list. Then humans began to protect the animals' home. The giant panda is now listed as "vulnerable," or at risk. Marco Lambertini is in charge of the environmental group World Wildlife Fund. He said the giant panda is a mascot who symbolizes the effort to save wildlife. "Knowing that the panda is now a step farther from extinction is an exciting moment," he said. Plants and animals all over the world need better protection. In Hawaii, most of the native plants are threatened with extinction. In Africa, the plains zebra population has declined since 2002\. For every four zebras there were in 2002, there are now only three.