Species of bee declared endangered in U.S. TRAVERSE CITY, Mich. — The rusty patched bumblebee is officially endangered. It is the first bumblebee in the continental United States to be named endangered by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service. The continental U.S. includes all states except for Hawaii.  The Fish and Wildlife Service is a government agency. It manages a list of plants and animals that are in danger of dying out forever. The list is part of the Endangered Species Act, an environmental law created to protect these species.  Rusty patched bumblebees have been dying in great numbers over the past 20 years. The Fish and Wildlife Service said it would create a plan to save the bee. It wants to encourage people to provide more habitat, or safe places to live and fly, for the bee. It also wants people to use fewer pesticides. These chemicals kill bugs to keep them from eating crops.  These steps might also help other natural pollinators, such as monarch butterflies. Pollinators move pollen from one plant to another. This helps the plants grow and produce fruits and vegetables.  Tom Melius works for the Fish and Wildlife Service. He said pollinators are "small but mighty parts" of nature that support us and our world. He said forests, parks, meadows and shrubs could not survive without them. Without pollinators, he said, people would have to pollinate crops by hand, which would be time-consuming and expensive.  The rusty patched bumblebee has rust-colored markings on its back. Many buzzed across the East Coast and the Midwest as recently as the 1990s. Today, only small numbers remain in 13 states and in parts of Canada. Nearly nine out of ten bee colonies have disappeared since the late 1990s. The crash happened so quickly that few scientists noticed until the damage was largely done. Now they're looking into possible causes for the decline. These include disease, pesticides, climate change and habitat loss. The population drop may also be making it harder for bees to find mates. The Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation is a non-profit group in Portland, Oregon. It works to protect bees, butterflies and other pollinators. In 2013, it asked the government to list the rusty patched bumblebee as endangered. A year later, the society filed a lawsuit with the Natural Resources Defense Council, another non-profit environmental group. They demanded that the Fish and Wildlife Service take action. A settlement was reached. It set a deadline for the decision to list the bee as endangered.  Rich Hatfield is a scientist at the Xerces Society. He said the group welcomes the decision by the Fish and Wildlife Service. He added that efforts to save the bumblebee will have far-reaching benefits. The work will help many other natural pollinators that are important to ecosystems and agriculture. Bees and other insects are very important to America's food supply. By pollinating plants, they help crops such as tomatoes, cranberries and peppers. Even plants that can pollinate on their own benefit from bees. These plants produce bigger fruit when bumblebees do the job instead. Bees are important to the natural food chain, too. They help wild plants grow and produce fruits, seeds and nuts that animals eat.    Fish and Wildlife Service scientists agreed that bumblebees, honeybees and monarch butterflies are dying for the same reasons. That raises concern for all types of  bumblebees in North America. The agency is also studying whether to add the monarch butterfly to the endangered list. Officials said they want people to adopt "bee-friendly practices." These practices include planting flowers and trees that bloom from spring through fall. They also want people to stop using pesticides that harm bees. Rebecca Riley works for the Natural Resources Defense Council. She said listing the bee as endangered is "the best and probably last hope" for keeping it alive.