World Conservation Congress in Hawaii reveals changes to endangered species list. HONOLULU, Hawaii — It's been a bad year for the world's largest living primate. The eastern gorilla has been listed as critically endangered. Four of the six great ape species are now only one step away from extinction, according to a report released Sunday at the World Conservation Congress in Hawaii. The International Union for the Conservation of Nature, or IUCN, just released its annual Red List of Endangered Species. The group cited unlawful hunting as the reason the eastern gorilla is now "critically endangered." The list contains more than 80,000 species. Almost 24,000 of those are threatened with extinction. "To see the eastern gorilla — one of our closest cousins — slide toward extinction is truly distressing," Inger Andersen, IUCN director general, said in a statement. "Conservation action does work and we have increasing evidence of it. It is our responsibility to enhance our efforts to turn the tide and protect the future of our planet." The organization said an estimated 5,000 eastern gorillas remain in the wild. Twenty years ago, there were nearly 17,000 eastern gorillas. They have declined by around 70 percent. There are seven surviving great ape species, which include the eastern gorilla, western gorilla, Bornean orangutan, Sumatran orangutan, chimpanzee, bonobo, and us — humans. Only the chimpanzee, bonobo and of course humans are not considered critically endangered. Still, bonobos and chimpanzees are listed as endangered. The majority of the world's eastern gorillas live in central Africa, in a country called the Congo. Conservation will be tough because of the country's political instability, said primatologist Russell Mittermeier. He is the chairman of IUCN's primates specialist group. "There are no simple solutions right now, other than a much greater investment in on-the-ground protection," Mittermeier said in an email to The Associated Press. He added that once the area becomes safer, "major ecotourism can take place." Natural habitat tourism is happening in the neighboring countries of Uganda and Rwanda.  Catherine Novelli is the U.S. undersecretary of state for economic growth, energy and the environment. In an interview, she called the gorilla numbers a man-made tragedy, or disaster caused by humans. This week, the IUCN is hosting the World Conservation Congress. More than 9,000 delegates from more than 180 countries are attending the conference in Honolulu. Several important leaders from around the world are going.  Putting the eastern gorilla on the critically endangered list "will raise the profile of this gorilla subspecies and bring attention" to its suffering, said the study's lead scientist, Andrew Plumptre. "It has tended to be the neglected ape in Africa, despite being the largest ape in the world." The IUCN's Red List is the most thorough study of endangered species. It guides government policy around the world, said Cristian Samper, president and CEO of the Wildlife Conservation Society. Other animals on the list fared better than the apes, including the giant panda, which was previously on the endangered list. It is now listed as "vulnerable," or at risk, after conservation efforts helped protect its natural home. "For over 50 years, the giant panda has been the globe's most beloved conservation icon," said Marco Lambertini. He is director general of the environmental group World Wildlife Fund. "Knowing that the panda is now a step farther from extinction is an exciting moment for everyone committed to conserving the world's wildlife." Hunting and the destruction of animals' homes are taking a toll on animals and plants in a variety of areas. For example, in Hawaii, about 90 percent of native plants are threatened with extinction. This is due to foreign species like rats, pigs and non-native plants, the IUCN said. In Africa, the plains zebra population has decreased since 2002\. For every four zebras that were there in 2002, there are now only three, according to the group's statement.