Species of bee declared endangered in U.S. TRAVERSE CITY, Mich. — The rusty patched bumblebee has become the first bee in the continental U.S. to be declared endangered. The bee has suffered a dramatic population decline over the past 20 years, federal officials said Tuesday. The United States Fish and Wildlife Service said it was adding the bee to the endangered list and would develop a recovery plan for it. The agency's plan would encourage people to provide more habitat and reduce the use of pesticides. Many of the steps needed to rescue the rusty patched bumblebee might also help other pollinators, such as struggling bees and monarch butterflies. Pollinators transport pollen from plant to plant to help them grow. "Pollinators are small but mighty parts of the natural mechanism that sustains us and our world," said Tom Melius from the Fish and Wildlife Service. "Without them, our forests, parks, meadows and shrublands, and the abundant, vibrant life they support, cannot survive." He also said the loss of pollinators would require humans to pollinate crops by hand, which is expensive and time-consuming. The rusty patched bumblebee is notable for the rust-colored marking on its back. It buzzed across the East Coast and much of the Midwest in high numbers as recently as the 1990s. Today, only scattered populations remain in 13 states, including Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia and Wisconsin, and the Canadian province of Ontario. The number of observed colonies has dropped by about 87 percent since the late 1990s. The crash happened so quickly that few researchers noticed until the damage was largely done. They're investigating a number of potential causes, including disease, pesticide exposure, habitat loss, and climate change. They are also studying whether the decline in population has in turn made it harder for bees to find suitable mates. The Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation is a non-profit organization in Portland, Oregon, that works to protect bees, butterflies, and other pollinators. In 2013, it petitioned the government to list the rusty patched bumblebee as endangered. A year later, the society filed a lawsuit with the environmental group Natural Resources Defense Council demanding that the Fish and Wildlife Service take action. A settlement was reached that set a decision deadline. The Xerces Society previously said the bumblebee's decline probably was caused by the spread of bacteria or viruses from bumblebees raised commercially to those in the wild. It also blamed widespread use of long-lasting insecticides. "The Fish and Wildlife Service has relied upon the best available science and we welcome this decision," said Rich Hatfield, the society's senior conservation biologist. He believes that addressing the threats faced by the rusty patched bumblebee will not only help the species, the work will also benefit other native pollinators that are critical to the functioning of ecosystems and agriculture. Fish and Wildlife Service biologists agreed there probably were overlapping factors behind recent declines of bumblebees, honeybees and monarchs. That raises concern for all 48 bumblebee species in North America. In September, the agency placed seven types of yellow-faced bees, Hawaii's only native bees, on the endangered list. It is also studying whether to add the monarch butterfly. Bees and other insects provide billions of dollars' worth of pollination services in the United States each year. Their work benefits crops such as tomatoes, cranberries and peppers. Even plants that can pollinate on their own generate bigger fruit when bumblebees do the job instead. Bumblebees also support flowers and wild plants that produce fruits, seeds and nuts  for the food chain. The Endangered Species Act is a United States environmental law that protect plants and animals at risk of becoming extinct. Officials said they would encourage landowners and local organizations to adopt "bee-friendly practices." Those practices include using native flower plants in landscapes and planting flowers and trees that bloom from spring through fall. Avoiding the use of pesticides that harm bees is another tactic. Listing the bee is "the best — and probably last — hope" for its survival, said Rebecca Riley, senior attorney with the Natural Resources Defense Council.