There is not a huge demand for pet skunks, but some people want one. So a small pet store sells them, along with dragons, rats and other unusual creatures that big stores don't bother with. LODI, N.J. — Pet store owner Joe Averso does not run your average pet store. His shop, NJ Exotic Pets, is in downtown Lodi, New Jersey. It sells creatures you might see on TV. You probably wouldn't find them at Petco or PetSmart, the largest pet store chains. Not all animal lovers want cats, dogs or fish. So Averso has made his shop the place for people who want something different. Reptiles like snakes and lizards, marsupials and hairless rats are examples. “You’ll never find a coatimundi in a Petco,” said Averso. A coatimundi is a South American cousin to the racoon. Averso had three of them in his shop one day. He got them from a Florida breeder and is selling them for $2,000 each. Averso, 44, has been in the pet-store business for 15 years. He opened NJ Exotic Pets a little more than a year ago. He has noticed that customers, especially younger ones, are more interested in unusual pets. They will pay higher prices, too. His top sellers are so-called pocket pets. These include sugar gliders and hedgehogs, small enough to fit in a pocket. Sugar gliders are named for their love of sweet nectars and their flying. They are 5-inch-long marsupials from the South Pacific. When they jump from one place to another, they appear to fly. Averso recommends that customers buy two, at $400 a pair. They need to have company. Averso also has what he described as a “super rare” striped possum. It is a larger South Pacific marsupial. It's about the size of a gray squirrel with black and white stripes, priced at $2,500. These he also he gets from his Florida breeder. Earlier this year, he received a hard-to-get license, or permission, from the state to sell skunks that were raised by breeders. Skunks come from North America. “We’ve already sold 35 of them,” he said. The price ranges from $650 to $950, depending on color and markings. You cannot keep a skunk in New Jersey unless it comes from someone with the state license. Averso is the only person in the state who is allowed to sell them. Skunk owners must pay $12 a year to keep their skunks. NJ Exotic Pets works closely with veterinarian Christopher Stancel. He is an exotic-pets expert in New Jersey. He takes the scent out of skunks and fixes them so they can't have babies. He does this before they are sold. Joe Ricciuti is the owner of 88 Pet World in Brick, New Jersey. He stopped selling skunks a number of years ago. “Is there high demand for pet skunks? No,” he said. “Are there people out there who want them? Yes,” Ricciuti said. And because they do want them, Megan Zayatz, 29, gets to clean the skunk cages. She manages the store. “People think it’s a cool job because you get to play with animals,” said Zayatz. She started working in pet stores at age 16. “But you don’t have time to play with them, and you touch poop with your hands.” Customer Chelsee Firestone, 18, said she and her friend drove about 20 miles to the store. They just wanted to see the snakes. “I first came here looking for ferrets and ended up falling in love with reptiles,” Firestone said. When asked if she owned any, she took a corn snake out of her pocket. It eats hairless, newborn mice called "frozen pinkies." Customer Hevin Shepstone of Lodi is one customer who admits that she wishes she did not buy a pet. She bought her son a lizard called a bearded dragon. It has cost her about $500 with all the supplies. “And you get to hold these things in your hand,” she said. She held up a bag of dragon food she bought. It contains live crickets, which are noisy at night.