The animal's wings resemble those of pheasants, but it couldn't flap quite like today's birds. A type of feathery dinosaur called Archaeopteryx was first discovered nearly 150 years ago. "Archaeopteryx" means "old wing." It established a connection that, up until that point, scientists had never made. The dinosaurs are ancestors of modern-day birds.  In 1861, German paleontologist Christian Erich Hermann von Meyer wrote a short paper about an unusual fossil. What appeared to be a bird feather was pressed into 150-million-year-old limestone. A full skeleton was found shortly after. The bones were discovered two years after Charles Darwin published his book "On the Origin of Species." In it, he describes how animal species evolve. Evolution is the process by which living things have developed over millions of years. It Was The Size Of A Crow - During the next 150-plus years, paleontologists discovered 10 more Archaeopteryx skeletons. A clearer picture of the creature emerged. The dinosaur was the size of a crow, weighed little more than a pound and was covered in feathers.  Still, having feathers, as the penguin and ostrich know, does not necessarily mean a bird species can fly. A recent study suggests that Archaeopteryx probably did flap through the air. The dinosaur did so unlike any bird flying today. Archaeopteryx used more shoulder action, the authors of the new report say. Imagine something like how a butterfly flaps its wings, according to Dennis Voeten. He's a researcher at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility in France and the study's lead author. Not everything that looks like a bird was a bird, especially in the Jurassic period, a time when dinosaurs ruled the Earth. Recent discoveries have suggested that Archaeopteryx was not a transitional dinosaur-to-bird fossil. There are now many finely feathered dinosaurs scientists know about. Archaeopteryx was probably not, Voeten said, a direct tie to sparrows and ostriches. It was probably a member of a separate group. Scientists Debate Its Ability To Fly As scientists have explored Archaeopteryx's family tree, they also questioned its ability to fly. In the second half of the 1900s, two ideas emerged. One group said, yes, Archaeopteryx flapped its way off the ground. The other group said, no, Archaeopteryx scrabbled up trees using its clawed wings, then let go and sailed to the ground like a flying squirrel. A few paleontologists suggested other ideas. Perhaps Archaeopteryx was in the process of losing its flight ability, not gaining it. In the new study, Voeten and his team examined Archaeopteryx fossils using a synchrotron machine, which puts out radiation waves to take pictures of objects. It is similar to an X-ray, but it's not like the one you'd find at the doctor or dentist. A typical X-ray machine would fail to tell fossilized skeletons apart from the background rock. A synchrotron beam is much more sensitive. Bones, Voeten pointed out, are records of the stresses we face in everyday life. "The right upper arm bone of a professional tennis player is thicker than the left upper arm bone," he said. Likewise, the stress of flying reshapes the wing bones in modern birds. Voeten decided to look for similar evidence in Archaeopteryx. Bones Resembled Those Of "Burst Fliers" - The study authors examined sections of the Archaeopteryx bones. They compared these structures to bones in flying birds, flightless birds, other dinosaurs and modern dinosaur-like reptiles, such as crocodiles. The Archaeopteryx's bones resembled what Voeten called "burst fliers." These are birds like pheasants, roadrunners, and turkeys. Such animals are comfortable on the ground, but capable of taking flight with a snap of the wings. The study concludes that Archaeopteryx was probably this type of flier. Still, it did not fly like a pheasant. In modern birds, the muscle groups that move wings up and down are attached at the sternum, or ribcage. It is like the wheel of a pulley. However, if you flap your arms to mimic a bird, you use muscles that are connected at the chest and shoulders. Archaeopteryx wings were attached like our human arms, with no chest pulley. "We're sure that it's incapable of flying like a modern bird does," he said. Voeten expects that the new study will attract Archaeopteryx flight critics and says, "I warmly welcome them." He is not totally attached to the idea Archaeopteryx could fly, he said. "This is a very famous, notorious debate that I am entering in as a new guy."