It's a sometimes angry argument. There are 50 million wild or abandoned cats in the U.S. ORLANDO, Fla. — Terise Marchelos pulled into a downtown parking lot. Soon, cats came running from all directions. Lots and lots of cats — tabbies, tuxedos, tortoiseshells. About 20 of the animals show up each evening when she arrives. The cats are homeless. Marchelos feeds them every day. Marchelos belongs to a group called CARE Feline TNR. CARE feeds many homeless cats. Not everyone is happy about something else CARE does, though. That something else is known as TNR, short for trap-neuter-return. TNR works like this: People trap cats, then take them to a vet. The cats are spayed or neutered, so they won't be able to have kittens. Some of the cats get adopted. Others are returned to the place where they live. People like Marchelos say TNR is a good idea. For them it is the best and kindest way to take care of homeless cats. And this country has a lot of feral cats: about 50 million. Some people, though, say TNR is mean. Life on the streets is hard for cats, they say. Homeless cats are often killed by animals or cruel humans. The cats shouldn't be put back on the streets, they say. It would be kinder to put them to sleep instead. That idea makes some people very angry. Cats have a right to live, they say. There's one big reason some people don't like cats living on the streets: They kill a lot of birds. Some studies say more than a billion birds get killed by cats each year. Cat lovers say cats don't really kill that many birds. The studies are wrong. Anyway, they add, people kill more birds than cats do. Julie Wraithnell is a bird lover. She agrees that homeless cats do kill many, many birds. She still doesn't think cats should be put to sleep, though. Two wrongs don't make a right, she says. Marchelos admits life on the streets is hard for cats. She’s seen it all: cats hit by trains, cats that have lost eyes, cats shot with BB guns. But she thinks putting cats to sleep isn’t the answer. For one thing, it won't take care of the problem. Homeless cats will always be around, she says. So it’s best that they receive the best possible care. “It’s never going to go away,” she said, looking out over her cats. “It’s not going to stop. This is still going to go on.”