There is much disagreement, often angry, over how best to handle the millions of feral cats across the country. ORLANDO, Fla. — When Terise Marchelos pulls up, the cats come running from all directions. Lots and lots of cats. Tabbies, tuxedos and tortoiseshells — about 20 of the animals greet her each evening when she arrives in a parking lot in downtown Orlando. She brings food every day to the colony of feral — that is, wild or abandoned — cats. It is just one of hundreds of feral-cat colonies her group, CARE Feline TNR, supports. But the simple act of feeding hungry cats is at the center of a fierce national debate. There is much disagreement, often angry, over how best to handle the millions of feral cats across the country. On one side of the battle are feral cat supporters. On the other side are bird lovers, environmentalists and even the animal-rights group PETA. At issue is the practice known as TNR, for trap-neuter-return. Volunteers feed and trap cats, take them to a veterinarian to be vaccinated and spayed or neutered, then return them to the area where they live. When possible, kittens and friendly adult cats are adopted out. Backers call it the best and kindest way to deal with the nation’s 50 million feral cats. Those against it call it a cruel practice. TNR, they say, only drags out the suffering of cats. Feral cats, they argue, can fall victim to cars, predators, disease and cruel humans. The issue is highly emotional and can be explosive. Respected environmental writer Ted Williams set off a firestorm last year when he suggested that feral cats should be poisoned. He argued this was necessary in order to protect wild birds. Outraged cat lovers protested, and Williams eventually apologized. A major line of attack against TNR is the claim that cats kill huge numbers of birds and other wildlife. One study found they kill up to 3.7 billion birds and 20.7 billion other small animals annually. Cat defenders fiercely dispute those numbers and say the studies are flawed. Julie Wraithnell of the bird-support group Audubon Florida accepts the studies. She calls the number of animal deaths blamed on feral cats “staggering.” But even so, she says, the answer is not killing cats: Two wrongs don't make a right. Alley Cat Allies, a national group, has long supported TNR efforts. It points out that humans cause many more bird deaths than cats do. “The larger issue is that trapping and killing has not worked,” said Elizabeth Holtz of Alley Cat Allies. “And we’ve certainly tried. That has been the American approach to feral cats for 40 or 50 years.” Holtz calls TNR “the only successful approach to feral cats that we currently have.” She argues that the anti-TNR position “assumes we have a choice between cats and no cats. We don’t. The cats are already there." She added, “It’s not as if you stop putting out bowls of food and the cats will go away. If people weren’t putting out food, they would just go through the trash. We believe we should treat animals humanely, and that TNR over time" will lower the feral population. The animal-rights group PETA opposes TNR, however. “In most situations it is cruel to both the cats and local wildlife,” said Teresa Chagrin of PETA. “I don’t think any true cat lovers would like to see cats left on the streets, chased by dogs, shot with arrows and pellet guns, set on fire, poisoned or torn apart by coyotes. These cats do not die kindly on the streets.” Chagrin thinks feral cats should be euthanized — that is, put to sleep. That, she said, is kinder than returning them to a dangerous life. Marchelos, the Orlando cat-feeder, admits that cats on the streets have it hard. She’s seen cats hit by trains, cats that have lost eyes to disease, cats shot with BB guns. But like Holtz of Alley Cat Allies, she insists that euthanizing isn’t the answer. Feral cats will always be around, she said, so it’s best that they receive the best possible care. “It’s never going to go away,” she said, looking out over her cats in the twilight. “It’s not going to stop. This is still going to go on.”