There are 50 million wild or abandoned cats in the U.S. How do you handle all those cats? It's a question with sometimes angry answers from both sides. ORLANDO, Fla. — When Terise Marchelos pulls up, the cats come running from all directions. Lots and lots of cats — tabbies, tuxedos, tortoiseshells. About 20 of the animals greet her each evening when she arrives in a parking lot in downtown Orlando. The cats are feral — that is, wild or abandoned. Marchelos feeds them every day. Marchelos belongs to a group called CARE Feline TNR. Her cats are just a few of the many that CARE Feline TNR supports. But the simple act of feeding hungry cats has many upset. There is fierce disagreement over how to handle the millions of feral cats across the country. On one side of the battle are feral cat supporters. On the other side are bird lovers, environmentalists and even the animal-rights group PETA. What people are arguing over is the practice known as TNR, for trap-neuter-return. TNR works like this: Volunteers trap cats, then take them to a veterinarian. The cats are vaccinated and spayed or neutered, then returned to the area where they live. When possible, kittens and friendly full-grown cats are adopted out. Backers call it the best and kindest way to deal with the nation’s 50 million feral cats. Those against it call it a cruel practice. TNR, they say, only drags out the suffering of feral cats. Such cats, they argue, can fall victim to cars, coyotes, disease and cruel humans. The question of how to deal with feral cats is highly emotional. People have strong feelings on the matter, and often become quite angry. Respected environmental writer Ted Williams upset many last year: He suggested that feral cats should be poisoned. Williams argued this was necessary in order to protect wild birds. Outraged cat lovers protested, and he eventually apologized. Many of those who oppose TNR give one main reason: Cats, they say, kill huge numbers of birds and other wildlife. One study found that cats kill up to 3.7 billion birds a year. On top of that, the study claimed, they kill up to 20.7 billion other small animals annually. Cat defenders say those numbers are way off. The studies, they argue, have been done the wrong way. Julie Wraithnell of the bird-support group Audubon Florida accepts the studies. She calls the number of animal deaths blamed on feral cats “staggering.” But even so, she says, the answer is not killing cats: Two wrongs don't make a right. Alley Cat Allies, a national group, has long supported TNR efforts. It points out that humans cause many more bird deaths than cats do. What's more, "trapping and killing has not worked,” said Elizabeth Holtz of Alley Cat Allies. “And we’ve certainly tried. That has been the American approach to feral cats for 40 or 50 years.” Holtz calls TNR “the only successful approach to feral cats.” She argues that those against TNR believe "we have a choice between cats and no cats. We don’t. The cats are already there." “It’s not as if you stop putting out bowls of food and the cats will go away,” Holtz added. “If people weren’t putting out food, they would just go through the trash." Alley Cat Allies, she said, thinks it is important that people treat animals kindly. And over time, she argues, TNR will lower the number of feral cats. The animal-rights group PETA is against TNR, however. “In most situations it is cruel to both the cats and local wildlife,” said Teresa Chagrin of PETA. “I don’t think any true cat lovers would like to see cats left on the streets." Feral cats, she said, are "chased by dogs, shot with arrows and pellet guns." She added, "these cats do not die kindly on the streets.” Chagrin thinks feral cats should be put to sleep. That, she said, is kinder than returning them to a dangerous life. Marchelos, the Orlando cat-feeder, admits that cats on the streets have it hard. She’s seen cats hit by trains, cats that have lost eyes, cats shot with BB guns. But like Holtz of Alley Cat Allies, she insists that euthanizing isn’t the answer. Feral cats will always be around, she said. So it’s best that they receive the best possible care. “It’s never going to go away,” she said, looking out over her cats. “It’s not going to stop. This is still going to go on.”