Fish ear bones, called otoliths, can be studied to show a fish's growth, as well as the condition of the ocean it lived in. They are shedding some light on climate change. SEATTLE — A tiny white sliver inside the heads of fish could hold evidence of a century’s worth of humans wrecking the environment: atomic bombs, overfishing, even climate change. Fish ear bones, also known as otoliths, are like tree rings for the ocean. A layer of calcium carbonate laid down each year offers a snapshot of both the fish’s yearly growth and its surrounding ocean. The University of Washington’s Burke Museum has been transferring and cataloging 2 million pairs of otoliths. Scientists hope this collection will help them track the health of fish populations and the ocean itself up and down the West Coast. It represents some 80 species gathered over the past half-century. The otolith collection had been sitting in an old Sand Point hangar. It belonged to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Ted Pietsch, a UW professor at the Burke Museum, got a grant last year to transfer the otoliths to the museum — all of a 10-minute drive away. The reason for the not-so-far move? Fire. The thousands of flammable Styrofoam boxes, piled 20 feet high and filled with ethanol for preservation, were a huge fire hazard. The threat of fire convinced the National Science Foundation to fund a two-year, $500,000 grant. Instead of sitting uncataloged in a hangar, the otoliths will be archived in the Burke. They can now be searched online by scientists and researchers. The UW recently made the first loan of the otoliths to Oregon State University. Researchers there are studying the age when flatfish settle to the ocean floor. A flatfish swims on its side and has both eyes on its upper side. Important information is held in the chemical makeup of each otolith layer. It has interested archaeologists, geochemists and fish biologists alike. Fishermen were the first to benefit from the otolith information. It is used in population models that help determine catch limits each year. Fish populations are closely managed by NOAA so as not to repeat disasters such as cod overfishing on the East Coast. Otoliths reveal age. When taken together with the sex, size and capture location for many fish, they paint a portrait of the population’s health. Scientists can calculate how much fishermen can catch without causing a whole species to collapse. Trained observers go to sea with fishermen to gather information. NOAA’s fishery research centers rely on scientific survey boats as well as these observers to collect otoliths. “Each fish has its sweet spot,” says Katherine Maslenikov, fish-collections manager at the Burke. She has dug through fish heads herself as an observer on fishing boats. Three pairs of otoliths — scientists collect only the largest pair — sit in capsules of liquid behind the fish’s head. Technically, they are stones, not bones, because they contain no live cells. Otoliths are unique to each species. A pollock’s are wing-shaped and about two centimeters long. Others are delicate white filigrees pretty enough for jewelry. The salmon has especially tiny and hard-to-find otoliths. This huge variation among species is what makes deciding the age of otoliths such difficult work. Determining the age of otoliths is the specialty of Tom Helser’s lab at the Alaska Fisheries Science Center, a part of NOAA. His 12-person lab ages about 30,000 otoliths a year. “Flight recorders” is how Helser likes to describes otoliths. Ocean temperature varies from shallow coastal waters to deeper ones, so otoliths record migration patterns in their levels of oxygen-18. Oxygen-18 is a slightly heavier version of the typical oxygen-16 atom we all know. Because it varies with temperature, the oxygen-18 level rises and falls with the seasons. Each rise and fall represents one year. A recent study in yellowfin sole found a sharp increase in oxygen-18 after the fish turned 7 years old, meaning it moved into deeper, colder waters. As juveniles, they must have lived near the coast. “This is an animal that responds extremely closely to temperature as it grows older,” said Helser. He noted how climate change could interfere with the fish’s usual behavior. Combining growth information with temperature could also shed light on [climate change](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=global+warming). On a longer time scale, 4,000-year old otoliths in prehistoric trash heaps are a record of ancient surface-water temperatures. This is the basis of a collaboration between Helser and archeologists in Newfoundland. The chemical signature of the atomic bomb is seen in otoliths, too. Some of the otoliths in the collection date to the 1960s, and that includes rockfish, which can live more than 100 years. The real goal in cataloging the collection is to aid this wide range of research. On a Thursday morning, Helser walked through the cavernous NOAA hangar counting pallets of otoliths. Next to boat parts and old office equipment are another 100 or so pallets yet to be moved to the UW. Each pallet contains up to 200 boxes. Each holds 100 pairs of otoliths when full. The UW is about halfway through cataloging the otoliths. A team of undergraduates is deciphering the scrawled handwriting and putting otoliths in orderly, archival-quality boxes. “I thought it was going to be overwhelming, just the number of samples,” said senior Kali Williams. She was sorting through her umpteenth box. “This process really highlights the value of collections,” added Maslenikov. “For a long time, they just kept them in boxes, and all of a sudden there’s this wealth of data so many people can use. What if they’d just pitched them?”