Called otoliths, fish ear bones can be studied to see how much a fish grew in a year, as well as the condition of the ocean it lived in. They're also shedding some light on climate change. SEATTLE — There is a tiny white sliver inside the head of every fish. It could show how humans have been wrecking the planet for a century. Atomic bombs, overfishing, even climate change are all there inside. Fish ear bones are also known as otoliths. They are like tree rings for the ocean. A layer laid down each year gives a snapshot of the fish’s yearly growth and its surrounding ocean. The University of Washington’s Burke Museum has 2 million pairs of otoliths. Scientists are sorting through this collection. They hope it will help them track the health of fish and oceans up and down the West Coast. The otolith collection had been sitting in an old hangar. They were in thousands of flammable boxes. They were piled 20 feet high and filled with oil for preservation. They could have caused a big fire. The threat of fire convinced the National Science Foundation to pay to move them. Instead of sitting in a hangar, the otoliths will be stored in the Burke Museum. Scientists from anywhere will also be able to search them online. Important information is held in each otolith layer. It interests all kinds of scientists. Fishermen were the first to benefit from the otolith information. It helps set catch limits each year. Otoliths show the age of a fish. That can be combined with other information to paint a picture of the population's health. Scientists can tell how much fishermen can catch without destroying a whole species. “Each fish has its sweet spot,” says Katherine Maslenikov. She is the fish-collections manager at the Burke. She has dug through fish heads herself as an observer on fishing boats. Three pairs of otoliths sit in pockets of liquid behind the fish’s head. Scientists collect only the largest pair. Technically, they are stones, not bones, because they contain no live cells. Otoliths are different in each species. A pollock’s are wing-shaped and about two centimeters long. Others are delicate and pretty enough for jewelry. The salmon has especially tiny and hard-to-find otoliths. This huge difference among species is what makes figuring out the age of otoliths such hard work. Determining the age of otoliths is Tom Helser’s specialty. He has a laboratory at the Alaska Fisheries Science Center. His lab figures out how old about 30,000 otoliths are a year. They hold growth information as well as temperature patterns. Combining the two could also shed light on [climate change](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=global+warming). Four-thousand-year-old otoliths in old trash heaps give a longer view. They are a record of ancient surface-water temperatures. Some of the otoliths in the collection date to the 1960s. That includes rockfish, which can live more than 100 years. The real goal in sorting through the collection is to help a wide range of research. On a Thursday morning, Helser walked through the huge hangar. Next to boat parts and old office equipment were another 100 or so stacks. They still had to be moved to the UW. Each stack contained up to 200 boxes. Each holds 100 pairs of otoliths when full. The UW is about halfway through sorting the otoliths. A team of students is trying to read the messy handwriting. Then they'll put the otoliths in neat boxes. “I thought it was going to be overwhelming, just the number of samples,” said senior Kali Williams. She was sorting through her umpteenth box. “This process really highlights the value of collections,” added Maslenikov. “For a long time, they just kept them in boxes. All of a sudden there’s this wealth of data so many people can use. What if they’d just pitched them?”