Otoliths, ear bones of fish, are being studied to shed light on climate change. They are like the rings of a tree, showing a fish's yearly growth and the condition of the ocean. SEATTLE — A tiny white sliver inside the heads of fish could show how humans have been wrecking the planet for a century. Atomic bombs, overfishing, even climate change are all there inside. Fish ear bones are also known as otoliths. They are like tree rings for the ocean. A layer laid down each year gives a snapshot of the fish’s yearly growth and what is happening in the ocean where it lives. The University of Washington’s Burke Museum has been sorting through 2 million pairs of otoliths. Scientists hope this collection will help them track the health of both fish and oceans up and down the West Coast. It represents some 80 species gathered over the past half-century. The otolith collection had been sitting in an old hangar. Scientists had been doing research on the collection. But they were in thousands of flammable boxes. They were piled 20 feet high and filled with ethanol for preservation. They could have caused a big fire. The threat of fire convinced the National Science Foundation to pay to move them. Instead of sitting un-sorted in a hangar, the otoliths will be stored in the Burke. Scientists from anywhere will also be able to search them online. The chemical makeup of each otolith layer holds important information. It interests all kinds of scientists and researchers. Fishermen were the first to benefit from the otolith information. It helps determine catch limits each year. Otoliths show fish age. When taken together with the sex, size and locations of capture for many fish, they paint a picture of the population’s health. Scientists can tell how much fishermen can catch without causing a lot of trouble for a whole species. “Each fish has its sweet spot,” says Katherine Maslenikov. She is the fish-collections manager at the Burke. She has dug through fish heads herself as an observer on fishing boats. Three pairs of otoliths sit in pockets of liquid behind the fish’s head. Scientists collect only the largest pair. Technically, they are stones, not bones, because they contain no live cells. Otoliths are different in each species. A pollock’s are wing-shaped and about two centimeters long. Others are delicate white lace pretty enough for jewelry. The salmon has especially tiny and hard-to-find otoliths. This huge differences among species is what makes deciding how old otoliths are such hard work. Deciding the age of otoliths is Tom Helser’s specialty. He has a laboratory at the Alaska Fisheries Science Center. His 12-person lab figures out the age of about 30,000 otoliths a year. “Flight recorders” is how Helser likes to describes otoliths. They hold growth information as well as temperature patterns. Combining the two could also shed light on [climate change](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=global+warming). Four-thousand-year-old otoliths in trash heaps from caveman times give a longer time scale. They are a record of ancient surface-water temperatures. This is the basis of a collaboration between Helser and archeologists in Newfoundland. Chemical signs from the atomic bomb are seen in otoliths, too. Some of the otoliths in the collection date to the 1960s. That includes rockfish, which can live more than 100 years. The goal in cataloging the collection is to help all types of research. On a Thursday morning, Helser walked through the huge hangar counting pallets of otoliths. Next to boat parts and old office equipment were another 100 or so pallets yet to be moved to the UW. Each pallet contains up to 200 boxes. Each holds 100 pairs of otoliths when full. The UW is about halfway through cataloging the otoliths. A team of undergraduates is trying to read the messy handwriting. Then they'll put the otoliths in orderly boxes. “I thought it was going to be overwhelming, just the number of samples,” said senior Kali Williams. She was sorting through her umpteenth box. “This process really highlights the value of collections,” added Maslenikov. “For a long time, they just kept them in boxes, and all of a sudden there’s this wealth of data so many people can use. What if they’d just pitched them?”