A yearlong fight between a Florida county and the state over backyard beekeeping ended when the county dropped the case, to the relief of honeybee hive hobbyists called "wannabees." Marcie Davis’ well-intentioned dream to cultivate a honeybee hive in her backyard landed her somewhere she did not expect – up close with the law. The Florida woman found herself in the middle of a swarming legal fight between Miami-Dade County and the state over the buzzing honeybees in her yard. The parties were sparring over the legality of backyard beekeeping. The county imposes strict limits on the numbers and locations of private beehives. The state, however, does not maintain the same policies. What ensued was a yearlong legal battle between the county and the state. To the relief of Davis and many eager, local beekeepers, the county backed off and dropped the case last week. As Davis put it: "God save the queen." The decision was a victory for Davis and other hobbyist beekeepers in Florida, but a small one in the larger war to save the honeybee. About 30 percent of the nation’s bees are dying every year, nearly double historic numbers, although last year the decline slowed slightly, beekeepers say. Over the past decade, bees have fallen victim to both natural and man-made dangers including disease, extreme weather, pesticides, invasions of other species and development that destroys habitats. Large swaths of single crops, called monocultures, also pose challenges for pollinating creatures, including bees. Honeybees pollinate 90 percent of the country's commercial crops. Fearing that the rapid drop in the bee population could lead to a national food crisis, the Obama administration recently designated a team tasked with saving the pollinators. One state buzzing with fear about the bee crisis is Florida, a major producer of honey. Florida’s climate lends itself to plants and bees. There is something in bloom 11 months out of the year and fields, yards and almost every open space are home to different types of wildlife. The flow of honey hardly ever stops. Bees play a critical role in Florida's economy. Honeybees are so important, in fact, that some beekeepers export the hives. Florida's hives are currently leased to 27 other states across the country. “Most people don’t know hundreds of thousands of bees are moved on semis all over the place,” said the assistant chief of Florida's Bureau of Plant and Apiary Inspection, David Westervelt. But when bees are dying, business dies too. The number of registered beekeepers across the entire state of Florida dropped to 700 in 2007, said William H. Kern Jr., who studies insects at the University of Florida. Recognizing the importance of this industry, Florida's Legislature passed a law permitting backyard beehive-keeping in 2012. By all accounts, the new law paid off. In the last year, the number of beekeepers jumped from 900 to 3,000. There are now 400,000 hives, up from 240,000 in 2013. Not all of these new beekeepers are professionals. Most are people who simply enjoy the backyard hobby. Longtime beekeepers, or apiarists, call these new hobbyists "wannabees." The wannabees are often younger than commercial apiarists and part of the local, organic food movement, said Al Salopek, president of the Palm Beach County Beekeeper's Association. "If mom and dad are keeping bees in the backyard, the kids are exposed and there's a chance they'll fall into the industry," Salopek said. John Gentzel started tending bees as a teenager in the 1960s. At one point he managed more than a thousand hives tucked into fields and yards from Homestead to Fort Myers to Big Pine Key. Today his Homestead house serves as his production plant. “I used to break state averages,” Gentzel said. “Thirty or 40 years ago, we were all over the place. The only thing you had to worry about was the queen dying.” Then his bees started acting funny. They’d venture out to look for food and get lost on their way back to the hive. Bloodsucking mites appeared, clinging to their backs. Bees are tidy and obsessively orderly, grooming one another and lining hives with a sticky glue loaded with antibiotics. But they couldn’t shake the mites that infested hives with fatal viruses. Solving this riddle of dying bees is complex, scientists say. There are two kinds of honeybees in the U.S.: domesticated and feral. Europeans first brought honeybees to North America. But four centuries of beekeeping has likely weakened the species. In the 1950s, a scientist hoping to produce a tougher tropical bee tried breeding South African bees with European bees in Brazil. Some African queens escaped, triggering what Mullins calls the most successful species invasion ever. By the 1990s, more aggressive Africanized bees showed up in North America and eventually hit Florida about 2005, Kern said. The state made keeping Africanized bees illegal. When disturbed, an entire Africanized honeybee hive will attack and even leave behind a stinger that attracts more bees to the victim. Because of the bad press that Africanized bees have received, the state has had a hard time convincing the public that more bees is a good thing. But beekeepers keep preaching the message: more European bees can dilute the aggressive Africanized bee population. The state even has inspectors who identify African hives and replace the queen with a gentler European bee. Tougher to tackle though is solving the problem of the ever-disappearing natural habitats where bees forage. The Toyne family started keeping bees in their Coral Gables neighborhood two years ago. Ten-year-old twins Kai and Nina are already committed beekeepers, eager to talk about the benefits of bees, despite the stings. The twins first discovered a hive their backyard when their house was being renovated. With the help of a beekeeping cousin, they persuaded their parents to start keeping hives. But a day after he set up the hives, their dad, Ross Toyne, said he got a ticket from the city. Luckily for the twins, their father is an attorney. He was able to take a stand and resolve the issue with the county. Toyne also helped Davis as she navigated her own thorny legal issues. When the county finally dropped Davis' case, both were stunned. The law also helped create much-needed buzz. In the years before it passed, there were perhaps a handful of beekeeping clubs in Florida. Now, there are 41, said Tom Nolan, president of the Florida State Beekeeper’s Association. But Nolan warned that the problems of disease and shrinking habitat still loom. Last year, the association failed to get the Florida Legislature to spend $2.5 million on a bee lab at the University of Florida. "The big question is how long can this go on," said Nolan. "Name a business that loses 30 percent of its inventory every year and still stays viable."