The state is worried that too many bees are dying each year. To help the honeybees, Florida passed a law that lets people keep beehives in their back yards. Marcie Davis wanted to build a honeybee hive in her backyard in Florida. But she was surprised to learn it was against the law in the county where she lives. The county's laws make it hard for homeowners to have backyard beehives. The county limits the number of backyard beehives that are allowed. However, Florida has different rules on what homeowners can do. Davis had to go to court if she wanted to keep her beehives. For about a year, the county and state argued about whether the beehives in backyards like Davis' should be allowed or not. Recently, the county pulled out of the case. Davis and other beekeepers were relieved. This was a success for Davis and others who like keeping bees in their yards. Still, there are many other challenges in the fight to save the honeybees. Every year in America, one in three honeybees will die. Over the last 10 years, bees have been dying fast. There are many reasons why they are disappearing. Some bees die from disease and harsh weather. Others die from man-made causes. Poisons that are used to protect crops from insects often kill bees and destroy their homes. Honeybees are important to plants and farmers all over the country. Bees have a job to do called pollination. When they pollinate, they help plants reproduce and grow. Honeybees pollinate nine out of every 10 crops that are sold across the United States as food. Bees are very important to growing fruits and vegetables. They also make honey. Many states across the country are worried about the many bees that are dying. Florida might be the most scared. The state makes a lot of the country's honey. The warm weather in Florida makes it easy for plants to grow and for bees to live. Many people in Florida work with bees to help make honey. Without bees, a lot of jobs and money would be lost. Florida wants to protect these insects. To help the bee population, the state now allows people to keep hives in their backyards. Before 2012, backyard beehives in neighborhoods were against the law. Then a law was passed to allow the hives. The number of beekeepers grew very fast after the law was passed. There are two times as many hives this year as there were last year. Many of these new beekeepers are not professionals. Not all beekeepers want to make money. Many like the hobby and taking care of the insects. Sometimes, kids learn about bees from their parents and fall in love with beekeeping. A set of twins in Florida decided they liked beekeeping all on their own. Ten-year old twins Kai and Nina Toyne discovered a hive in their backyard when their house was going through construction. They convinced their parents to start keeping hives. Now, the Toyne family keeps bees in the backyard of their Florida home. Kai and Nina are excited about their bees. They are not scared of the stings. Kai and Nina's father, Ross Toyne, is a lawyer. He helped Marcie Davis with her court case. Both Toyne and Davis were surprised when the county dropped the case. It meant Davis could keep her hives. They can continue to help the honeybees.