The remarkably petite pterosaur lived 77 million years ago Scientists have found the bones of a very small pterosaur. Most pterosaurs were giants. The newly discovered animal was no bigger than a house cat. It was probably not a baby either. Most likely, it was fully grown. Pterosaurs lived in the time of the dinosaurs. Both roamed the Earth millions and millions of years ago.  Pterosaurs were the world's last flying reptiles. Today, there are still many kinds of reptiles. Snakes and turtles are both reptiles, for example. Of course, they cannot fly.  Pterosaurs flew above the dinosaurs for more than 100 million years. Both died out 66 million years ago. The largest Pterosaurs were as big as giraffes. Their wings were like the wings of a small airplane. The newly found pterosaur lived 77 million years ago. Its bones were preserved in stone. Such bones are known as fossils. Scientists thought small pterosaurs died out millions of years ago. They thought birds killed them off.  Birds showed up long after the first small pterosaurs. They were better at finding food. Scientists thought they made small pterosaurs die out. They figured the small pterosaurs could no longer find enough to eat. The new pterosaur fossil was found in Canada. Its wings were less than five feet across. Its body was no larger than a house cat. Of course, it was a lot uglier than a cat.  Scientist Elizabeth Martin-Silverstone led the new study. "This new pterosaur is exciting," she said. It shows small pterosaurs were around much longer than anyone thought. Martin-Silverstone said there is a reason small pterosaurs have not been found before. Smaller fossils do not last as long as big ones. Many turn to dust over time.  There could have been plenty of small pterosaurs, she said. It is just that we are not likely to find their bones. Unfortunately, the new fossil cannot tell scientists much. There is just not enough of it left. Only a few bones remain. Some are broken into bits and pieces. Hopefully, other fossils will be found soon. They may tell us more about these strange flying reptiles.