The remarkably petite pterosaur lived 77 million years ago Scientists have found the bones of a remarkably small pterosaur. Most pterosaurs were giants, but this creature was no bigger than a house cat. Pterosaurs are often confused with dinosaurs. In fact, they are not even closely related. As Brian Switek once wrote, "A pterosaur is no more a dinosaur than a goldfish is a shark."  Instead, pterosaurs were the world's last flying reptiles. In modern times, the reptile family includes such creatures as lizards, snakes, crocodiles and turtles.  Pterosaurs soared above the dinosaurs for more than 100 million years until both died out 66 million years ago. The largest of their kind were as big as giraffes. Their wings were as broad as the wings of a small plane. The newly found pterosaur lived just 77 million years ago. Its bones were in a preserved form known as a fossil. The new discovery suggests that small pterosaurs may have held on longer than scientists believed. Small winged reptiles were thought to have been edged out by birds.  Birds first appeared long after the earliest pterosaurs. They were better at flying and at finding food than small pterosaurs were. Scientists had thought that small pterosaurs died out after birds showed up. The new pterosaur fossil was found in what is now British Columbia, Canada. The creature seems to have had a wingspan of less than five feet across. With its wings folded, it would have been no larger than a house cat. Of course, its beak would have kept it from being very snuggly.  "This new pterosaur is exciting," said study leader Elizabeth Martin-Silverstone. "It suggests that small pterosaurs were present all the way until the end of the Cretaceous."  The Cretaceous was a time period that lasted 79 million years. It stretched from around 145 million years ago to 66 million years ago. Martin-Silverstone says she thinks she knows why small pterosaurs have not been found before. Smaller fossils do not last as well as larger ones. Over millions of years, many smaller fossils turn to dust.  The bones of pterosaurs are hollow and do not last well, Martin-Silverstone said. However, the bones of larger animals seem to last longer.  "This suggests that a small pterosaur would very rarely be preserved," she said.  However, that does not mean there were no small pterosaurs, Martin-Silverstone said. Perhaps it only means we are not likely to find their bones. Not everyone is certain the new fossil really is a newly discovered kind of small pterosaur, however. The tiny fossil is not complete. It is just a forelimb, a few bits of the spine, and various other tiny bits of bone.  Scientist Richard Butler says the bones could have come from a baby pterosaur. They could even have come from another kind of animal entirely.  The fossil is most likely a pterosaur, Butler said. However, Martin-Silverstone and her team "cannot be completely certain that it is not a bird." The main reason for thinking the creature is not a bird is its vertebrae, or spine. The scientists believe they see something called a notarium.  A notarium is a section of a vertebrae in which usually separate bones are fused, or joined together in one lager piece. It helped support the pterosaurs' strong, muscled wings. Birds do not have a notarium. The newly found fossil is not complete enough to tell scientists much. Hopefully, more fossil evidence will be found soon. Perhaps then we will be able to learn more about these strange, tiny flying reptiles from millions of years ago.