The remarkably petite pterosaur lived 77 million years ago Scientists have found the petrified bones, or fossils, of a remarkably small pterosaur. While most pterosaurs scientists have evidence of were giants, this creature was no bigger than a modern-day house cat. Pterosaurs are often confused with dinosaurs. In fact, they are not even closely related. As Brian Switek once wrote, "A pterosaur is no more a dinosaur than a goldfish is a shark." Instead, these creatures were the world's last flying reptiles. They soared above the dinosaurs for more than 100 million years until both died out 66 million years ago, at the end of the Cretaceous Period. The largest of their kind could grow to be as big as giraffes, with wingspans like small planes. The newly found pterosaur lived just 77 million years ago. Its discovery suggests that small pterosaurs could have held on far longer than scientists had assumed. Small winged reptiles were thought to have been edged out by birds. The new fossil was found in what is now British Columbia, Canada. The creature seems to have had a wingspan of less than five feet across. With its wings folded up against its tiny body, it would have been no larger than a modern domestic cat, standing just a foot tall. Of course, its beak would have kept it from being very snuggly. Based on a study of the bones, the researchers feel confident that their specimen was an adult, not a baby. "This new pterosaur is exciting," said study leader Elizabeth Martin-Silverstone. "It suggests that small pterosaurs were present all the way until the end of the Cretaceous, and weren't outcompeted by birds." Researchers have long noted that fossils of pterosaur babies almost never show up. Since these giant reptiles must have been babies once, the lack of fossil evidence suggests that smaller fossils do not last as well as larger ones. Over millions of years, many smaller fossils may simply turn to dust. Perhaps that is why species like the one Martin-Silverstone identified have not been spotted before. "The hollow bones of pterosaurs are notoriously poorly preserved," Martin-Silverstone said. However, the bones of larger animals seem to hold up better. "This suggests that a small pterosaur would very rarely be preserved, but not necessarily that they didn't exist." Until now, scientists have assumed that as birds developed, they became far more successful at hunting for food than small pterosaurs, which then died out. The new fossil find suggests that assumption might be wrong. However, not everyone will accept the new find, because the tiny fossil is incomplete: It is just a forelimb, a few bits of the spine and various tiny fragments of bone. The fossil is so incomplete that the researchers did not try to name the animal as a new species, because it would be difficult to prove just what other creatures it was most closely related to. Scientist Richard Butler says the bones could have come from a baby pterosaur — or even from another kind of animal entirely. It is most likely a pterosaur, he said, but Martin-Silverstone and her team "cannot be completely certain that it is not a bird." The main argument for the creature not being some kind of bird is its vertebrae, or spine. The researchers believe they see something called a notarium, a section of fused vertebrae that helped pterosaurs support powerful, muscled wings. Birds do not have this structure. The newly found fossil is too incomplete to tell scientists much. However, other specimens could help fill in the gaps of the story. "What we have now — it's not enough," study co-author Mark Witton said. Hopefully, more fossil evidence can be found, perhaps even in museum storage, hidden away and misidentified.  "There are so many things in museums that people aren't looking out for," Witton said. "What we want to do is put these things on the radar of researchers."  In time, scientists may discover enough fossil evidence to give us a fuller picture of the tiny flying reptiles from millions of years ago.