In less than 50 years, the world has lost more than 3 percent of all its frog species, one scientist has determined. What is behind the mass extinctions? Researchers have yet to find out. There has been extensive research attempting to predict the future of Earth's endangered plants and animals. Yet there have been comparatively few studies investigating life forms that have already gone extinct. Looking backward is an important method in understanding how extinction rates have changed over time. It also helps identify the environmental factors that have influenced extinctions and how seriously they have affected Earth's ecosystems. Now, a researcher from Macquarie University in Australia has published a study examining recent extinctions within two disappearing groups of animals — reptiles and amphibians. The results are alarming. Most notably, they indicate that approximately 200 frog species have already gone extinct, and hundreds more may be on their way out. John Alroy, a professor of biological sciences and the paper's author, said he was inspired to conduct the study when a journalist asked him what scientists know about the number of species that have already gone extinct. "I looked for a paper where they do this, and I didn't find one," Alroy said. So he decided to analyze a large group and settled on reptiles and amphibians. He chose them partly because there was much data available for these groups, and partly because of a growing concern in the scientific community over frog populations, which are thought to be declining in many places. "There was a very strong indication that I would get some frog extinctions," Alroy said. And he did. Alroy estimated the probability of past extinctions for certain types of amphibians and reptiles, including frogs, salamanders, snakes and lizards. He used museum collections and published documents to figure out when an animal was last seen and found that frogs seemed to be the most likely to become extinct. The results suggested that more than 3 percent of all frog species have disappeared, largely since the 1970s. The study also shows that about 200 frog species have gone extinct and hundreds more will be lost over the next century. "So we are on pace to create a mass extinction," over a very long time period — possibly thousands of years — the study states. This is a worrisome finding, especially since Alroy describes his method as highly conservative, meaning that probably more extinctions have actually taken place than he discovered. And the results also predict that if these extinction rates keep up, nearly 7 percent of frogs could be lost in the next century. "Thus, the data suggest that a runaway train of extinction is now likely to produce what would be seen as a global mass extinction," Alroy writes in the paper. To put those numbers in context, the data suggest that extinction rates for reptiles and amphibians are about 10,000 times larger than for all other organisms. In general, though, other types of amphibians and reptiles experienced lower extinction rates than frogs. "I found a much smaller proportional number of extinctions for snakes and lizards — half as much," Alroy said. He said the message is that snakes and lizards are more resilient, or better able to withstand or recover quickly from difficult conditions. These results weren't necessarily surprising, since scientists are already aware that frogs are a particularly fragile group. "They're seen as a 'canary in the coal mine' group because they seem to suffer large population losses more easily than other groups," Alroy said. Miners used to bring canaries into mines and if there were dangerous gasses, the gasses would kill the canary, thus warning the miners. What surprised Alroy was where the frogs became extinct. In addition to large losses in Central America, Alroy also noted extinctions in Brazil, Madagascar and New Guinea. "I think there are mass extinctions happening in the tropics that are largely undocumented." It is unclear what's been causing these extinctions, which seem to have accelerated in the past several decades. They could be due to a variety of factors including habitat destruction and the devastating effects of a deadly fungus called Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis on frogs. There wasn't a clear pattern between environmental pressures and extinctions. For instance, some places with high rates of extinction were also known hotspots for the fungus, while others had no documentation of the fungus ever being present. That might be one of the most concerning points of all, since it means scientists still do not have a clear idea of what's killing off the frogs. "Honest to goodness, I don't know what's going on," Alroy said. "The pattern seems to be that there are more extinctions in the wet tropics." He called this "not too surprising" because the tropics have the most biodiversity, or the largest variety of different types of life found on Earth. But that still does not answer the question of why the frogs are becoming extinct. Future research should concentrate on the environmental pressures that are causing extinctions in different locations, Alroy said. Then scientists might be able to start taking action to save the frogs. Alroy notes that when conducting such research in the future, it is important for scientists to look at the broad range of environmental factors that might be affecting an animal. Alroy said scientists tend to focus strongly on the potential impact of climate change. And while climate change is likely to be an important factor in the coming years "we've already seen the beginning of a major mass extinction." "I'm not saying we should stop looking at climate change," he added. However, scientists should focus on other possible causes like "habitat destruction and invasive species in particular." So he's "hoping this paper will encourage more research of that kind."