Frogs can quickly grab prey with a force stronger than their own weight. The sticky slime on their tongues works like a superglue and scientists want to know more about it. Every predator needs to catch its prey, even frogs. Humans use their hands. Sharks and wolves use their jaws. Frogs use their tongues. To understand just how frogs snatch their food, scientists studied the frogs’ tongues in action. They found that some frogs can lift food up to three times heavier than their own weight. Their tongues have something sticky on them. It works like the glue on Post-it notes. For the experiment, the researchers used horned frogs. The horned frog is a round frog with evil-looking "horns" above its eyes. Horned frogs like to squat and wait for prey to wander by. Then they catch their victims with their strong tongues. Because they like to stay still, they are easy subjects to use in studies. They are also known for their big appetites. They sometimes catch prey more than half as big as they are. The scientists put glass plates fitted with pressure sensors about an inch from the frogs' faces. The pressure sensors could feel how hard the tongues would hit the plates. Then they placed grasshoppers behind the glass. The hungry frogs' tongues thwacked against the glass. Their tongues left behind prints on the glass. These gave scientists an idea of the size of the contact area and the amount of mucus on the tongue. The researchers found something about the sticky force of the frogs’ tongues. They found the force was much greater than their body weight. On average, it was about 1 1/2 times as much force. One hungry young frog managed to slam his tongue into the plate with 3.4 times the force of his own weight. “I knew these frogs could eat large things,” said Thomas Kleinteich. He is the lead author of the study and a zoologist in Germany. “But I didn’t really expect that the forces would be that high.” Kleinteich’s discovery may help explain the speed of the frogs’ tongues. It is amazing. They can dart in and out of frogs' mouths in less than a second. “People always think the speed is to catch elusive prey,” Kleinteich said. Actually, the results give another possible reason. Greater speed means more power. It also means more adhesion and a bigger meal. This ability to bring in large prey is important. It would be especially helpful for a sit-and-wait species like the horned frog, said Kiisa Nishikawa. She is an amphibian biologist in Arizona. She was not involved in the study. One meal is all they might need to eat for a whole year, Nishikawa said. She should know. She has a horned frog at home that hasn’t eaten since November. Kleinteich also wanted to understand how the frogs' tongues work. He looked for connections between what he saw. He looked at the force of the tongue when it hits the glass. He compared that with its sticky strength and the amount of tongue slime on the plate. He hoped to find out more about the frogs’ amazing sticking talent. Kleinteich thinks he has found the answer. Frogs' tongues are sticky, but need pressure to stick. They work similar to sticky tape and Post-it notes. It allows them to stick to a surface and later be removed without a trace. Like tape, the frogs’ tongues had more adhesive strength when they hit the plate with more force. “That’s the pressure part,” Kleinteich said. “Imagine you have a piece of sticky tape and you’re pulling on it,” Kleinteich said. You need a lot of force first to start a crack. "Then it gets less and less and less.” Beyond this, Kleinteich doesn’t know much more. He doesn't know what parts of frogs’ tongues do the sticking. That is the topic of his current studies. But he can say that the frogs' stickiness beats Post-It notes and tape.