Frog's fast feast In the comic book series "X-Men," a villain named Toad has a surprising superpower. He uses a 30-foot tongue to attack his enemies.  A real frog tongue can be just as quick and deadly. The bugs that frogs snack on don't have a chance when they are snatched up by this sticky tongue. Scientists have been fascinated by frog tongues for a long time. One of the first studies of frog tongues was published in 1849\. It was done by a scientist named Augustus Waller. He wrote that the tongue helps a frog catch dinner by shooting out of the frog's mouth and wrapping around an unsuspecting insect. Later, German scientists studied horned frogs. They saw that it took these frogs just fractions of a second to catch a bug. There was something scientists still did not understand, though. They didn't know how a frog tongue could hold onto a bug so well.  Scientists did know the tongues were very sticky. One 2014 study showed that a frog tongue could carry objects nearly one and a half times the frog's body weight. Some experts compare frog tongues to rolls of sticky tape. Alexis C. Noel is a scientist at the Georgia Institute of Technology. She studies animal movement. She began to wonder if scientists had missed something important about the frog tongue.  Noel was inspired by a YouTube video. In the video, a real-life bullfrog is playing a mobile game called "Ant Smasher." The frog tries to use its tongue to catch fake bugs on the screen. The video made Noel think there must be a trick to the frog's sticky tongue skills. The trick turned out to be frog spit, Noel learned. She did a study on frog tongues. The study showed that frog spit can change. Sometimes, it is like a glue thicker than honey. Other times, it will change to a thinner fluid. Then it can change back again. These changes help the frog tongue to capture and hold its prey.  Humans produce a lot of spit, but frogs do not need much at all. Noel spent several hours squeezing frog tongues just to get one milliliter of saliva she needed for the study.  Noel and her team used special high-speed cameras to watch frogs catch food. This allowed them to identify the three steps of a frog tongue attack.  First, when the tongue slaps into a bug, the tongue wraps around the prey. After this, the thicker spit turns thinner. It trickles into the tiny cracks of the bug's shell. Second, the tongue shoots back into the mouth. Meanwhile, the spit becomes thick again. This helps hold the bug in place.  Finally, the frog needs to unstick the bug from the spit. To do so, the frog presses down with its eyes. For a second, the frog's eyeballs disappear into its mouth. This breaks the bug free from the sticky tongue. It pushes the bug down the frog's throat.  The scientists tested seven species of frogs. All of the frogs had similar tongues that worked in a similar way. Chameleons capture prey this way, too, Noel said.  Noel's study gives scientists a better understanding of how frogs capture bugs to eat. This is important at a time when many types of frogs are at risk in  the wild. The study may also give inventors new ideas, Noel says. It could help humans make new type of sticky substance. Or maybe one day someone will build a frog-like drone, or flying robot, that can pick things up the way a frog tongue does, she says.