The federal wildlife agency wants to protect the amphibians in the Sierra Nevada mountains. People who live there say they're worried that logging and grazing might be stopped, hurting jobs. FRESNO, Calif. — There is a big fight brewing over frogs and toads in California's Sierra Nevada mountains. On one side are people who live in the mountains and the Fresno County sheriff. On the other side are U.S. wildlife officials. They want to protect the animals under a law called the Endangered Species Act. The people who live in the mountains worry that the protection plan will stop logging, grazing and hiking on the land. Businesses and jobs will be lost, they say. Fish and Wildlife leaders say they are not planning to shut down forests. “We don’t have the authority to do that,” Fish and Wildlife spokesman Robert Mole said. The government plans to call some areas a "critical habitat." The idea is to try to protect the frogs and toads, he said. It would not "block growth" or stop stop people from going into the forest. The animals are the mountain yellow-legged frog and the Yosemite toad. Like other amphibians, they live in land and water. Lots of things are killing them. One is a mold-like disease. They are also losing the places where they like to live. Fish that eat the animals have also been added to the area. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in April announced the protection plan. People who support nature have been asking for protection for the toads and frogs for years. The service also wants to set aside 1.83 million acres of critical habitat for the amphibians. The areas are needed for the frogs and toads to live. But worried people in California asked for a delay. The plan reminds people in Fresno County of bad things that happened in the 1990s. That is when the government decided to protect the California spotted owl and other animals. The logging business suffered. The owl was not an [endangered species](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species). But the government protected large, old trees. The owls liked to live in the trees. Logging slowed down a lot. Most lumber mills in the area closed. Money dried up in some towns. Fresno County Sheriff Margaret Mims is the Fresno County Sheriff. She said she is worried about money for the police and public safety. “I don’t want people who live 3,000 miles away" telling us what to do, she said at a public meeting last month. Mims later said she was worried about businesses. She said new or growing businesses might have more paperwork to do. U.S. government leaders said they were not invited to the public meeting. They said there may be a misunderstanding about what happens if land is called a critical habitat. The term only matters on land owned by the government and or projects needing U.S. government permission, spokesman Mole said. The government must be asked in those cases. The Madera Water Bank is one example. The water bank is in California's San Joaquin Valley. The bank is in a place where the blunt-nosed leopard lizard, Fresno kangaroo rat and other protected animals live. It cost more to get the project going. There were studies done. Land was set aside for the animals. More than 300 types of plants and animals are under U.S. government protection in California. That is the most animals in any state and second-most plants. Nature supporters have been pushing for 10 years to get the government to protect the animals. So have some scientists. The animals have been dying much too fast over the past 20 years, scientists say. The biggest problems are fish planted in high mountain lakes and a mold-like infection, said scientist Vance Vredenburg. The fish and the infection have wiped out millions of frogs, he said. Chemicals used in farming have also hurt the frogs, a study showed. The frogs and toads are important. They eat insects and are eaten by other creatures. That makes them part of a mountain community that improves air and water quality, Vredenburg said. “We need to pay attention to this,” he said. “Amphibians are long-term survivors. They’ve been around more than 300 million years.”