The "slime" on a frog's tongue is what it uses to quickly grab and hold its prey. It is similar to a strong tacky glue, and the frog can lift meals up to three times heavier than itself. Frogs are predators, and every predator needs to catch its prey. Humans use their hands, sharks and wolves use their jaws, but frogs are among the few animals that use something much stranger: their tongues. To understand just how frogs snatch their snacks, scientists took direct measurements of the amphibians’ tongues in action. It was the first time anyone had done that. They found that certain frogs can lift meals up to three times heavier than their body weight, although they probably couldn’t eat them. They use a sticking substance similar to the tacky glue on Post-it notes. The scientists published their study this week in the journal Scientific Reports. For the experiment, the researchers used the horned frog, a round South American amphibian with evil-looking "horns" above its eye sockets. Horned frogs prefer to hunker down and wait for their prey to wander by before snagging their victims with powerful tongues. Their stationary habits make them easy subjects to use in studies. They are also known for their big appetites — they have been caught tackling prey more than half their size. Just before mealtimes, the scientists put glass plates fitted with pressure sensors about an inch from the frogs' faces. Then they offered up delicious grasshoppers behind the glass. When the hungry frogs thwacked their tongues against the plates, the sensors measured their force. The tongue prints they left behind gave scientists an idea of the size of the contact area and the amount of mucus on the tongue. The researchers found that the adhesive, or sticky, force of the frogs’ tongues was greater than their body weight by 50 percent. One hungry young frog managed to slam his tongue into the plate with 3.4 times the force of his own weight. “I knew these frogs could eat large things,” said Thomas Kleinteich, a zoologist at Kiel University in Germany and lead author of the study. “But I didn’t really expect that the forces would be that high.” Kleinteich’s observations may help explain the astonishing speed of the frogs’ tongues. They can dart in and out of frogs' mouths in milliseconds. “People always think the speed is to catch elusive prey, which makes sense,” said Kleinteich. However, the results present another possible reason for fast-flicking frogs. Greater speed means more power, more adhesion and, ultimately, a bigger meal. This ability to reel in large prey would be a particular help to a sit-and-wait species like the horned frog, said Kiisa Nishikawa. She is an amphibian biologist in Arizona who was not involved in the study. “One meal could be their energy budget for an entire year,” Nishikawa said. She should know. She has a horned frog at home that hasn’t eaten since November, when it went into hibernation for the winter. Kleinteich also wanted to understand how the frogs' tongues work. So he searched for connections between the force of the tongue when it hits, its adhesive strength and the amount of mucus slimed on the plate. He hoped to find out more about frogs’ fantastic sticking talent. “The common opinion is that the mucus is some sort of superglue that sticks to everything immediately,” Kleinteich said. But the results of his experiment showed exactly the opposite: Stronger adhesion occurred with less mucus. Kleinteich thinks how it works most is closest to pressure-sensitive adhesion. That is the same effect that allows sticky tape and labels to cling to a surface and later be removed without a trace. Structural adhesives like glue harden to form a permanent bond. But pressure-sensitive adhesives use a substance somewhere between a solid and liquid. It must be fluid enough to form a connection between the surfaces it binds, but elastic enough to resist being ripped apart. Like tape, the frogs’ tongues had a greater adhesive strength when they hit the plate with more force. “That’s the pressure part,” Kleinteich said. The way the forces changed as the frogs pulled their tongues back from the plate was another indication. “Imagine you have a piece of sticky tape and you’re pulling on it,” Kleinteich said. “You need a lot of force first to initiate a crack, and then it gets less and less and less.” The force of the frogs freeing their tongues from the plates mirrored this pattern. Beyond this, Kleinteich doesn’t know exactly what parts of frogs’ tongues do the sticking — this is the topic of his current research. However, the frogs’ version of pressure-sensitive adhesion beats our human-made imitations in several ways. First, Kleinteich said, frogs can catch and swallow many different kinds of prey. Some have hair, some have feathers, some have spines. “Their tongues stick to everything,” Kleinteich said, something household tape infuriatingly fails to do. Frogs’ tongues also stick immediately. They don’t have to battle to hold onto a fly the way we struggle to hang a poster on the wall or seal a package. If scientists can learn more about how frogs’ tongues are so good at sticking, they could put the same principles to work in products for people. “There has been a strong focus in materials science to get inspired by biological materials,” he said. It may not happen any time soon. But someday we might look back and see how frog tongues helped us lick the problem of sticky tape.