In less than 50 years, the world has lost more than 3 percent of all its frog species, one scientist has determined. What is behind the mass extinctions? Researchers have yet to find out. Many scientists have tried to predict the future of Earth's endangered plants and animals. Yet, few studies have investigated those that already have become extinct. Looking backward is important for understanding how extinction rates have changed over time. It also identifies factors in the environment that have had an impact. Now, a researcher from Macquarie University in Australia has published a study examining recent extinctions within two groups of animals — reptiles and amphibians. The results are alarming. Most importantly, the study found that approximately 200 frog species have already gone extinct, and hundreds more may be dying out. John Alroy is a science professor at the university and the paper's author. The study was inspired by the question of a journalist. Alroy was asked what scientists know about the number of species that have already gone extinct. "I looked for a paper where they do this, and I didn't find one," Alroy said. So he decided to write it himself. He chose reptiles and amphibians partly because there was a large amount of information available for these groups, and partly because scientists are increasingly concerned over frog populations, which are thought to be shrinking in many places. "There was a very strong indication that I would get some frog extinctions," Alroy said. And he did. Alroy estimated past extinctions for certain types of amphibians and reptiles, including frogs, salamanders, snakes and lizards. He used museum collections and published documents to figure out when an animal was last seen and found that frogs seemed to be the most likely to become extinct. The results showed that more than 3 percent of all frog species have disappeared, largely since the 1970s. The study suggests that about 200 frog species have gone extinct and hundreds more will be lost over the next century. "So we are on pace to create a mass extinction," the study states. The study also predicts that nearly 7 percent of frogs could be lost in the next century. Over a much longer time period, maybe thousands of years, there could be a global mass extinction of frogs, Alroy writes in the paper. In fact, extinction rates for reptiles and amphibians seem to be about 10,000 times that for other life forms. In general, though, frogs had the highest rate of extinction, with snakes and lizards about half that. What surprised Alroy was where the frogs became extinct. In addition to large losses in Central America, Alroy also noted extinctions in Brazil, Madagascar and New Guinea. Alroy thinks that more frogs are going extinct in the tropics than scientists realize. Scientists do not know what's been causing these extinctions, which seem to have been increasing in the past several decades. They could be due to a variety of factors. Reasons could include the destruction of their habitat, and the effects of a deadly fungus called atrachochytrium dendrobatidis on frogs. There wasn't a clear pattern. For instance, some places with high rates of extinction were also hotspots for the fungus, while in others scientists do not even know if the fungus was present. That might be one of biggest problems of all. It means that scientists still do not have a clear idea of what's killing off all the frogs. "Honest to goodness, I don't know what's going on," Alroy said. "The pattern seems to be that there are more extinctions in the wet tropics." He called this "not too surprising" because the tropics have the most biodiversity, or the largest variety of different types of life found on Earth. But that still does not answer the question of why the frogs are becoming extinct. Alroy said that scientists should look at the various environmental factors that may be causing extinctions in different locations. Then scientists might be able to start taking action to save them. Alroy said scientists tend to focus strongly on the possible effects of climate change, the heating up of the earth. He added that climate change is likely to be an important factor in the coming years. However, "we've already seen the beginning of a major mass extinction," he said. "I'm not saying we should stop looking at climate change," he added. However, he said that scientists should really look at other possible causes. "So I'm hoping this paper will encourage more research of that kind."