Frog's fast feast In the "X-Men" comic book series, a villain named Toad had a superpower inspired by a real-life frog's tongue. Toad used his 30-foot-long tongue to do battle with his enemies. Amazingly, the real amphibian tongue can be just as quick and deadly — for a cricket, that is. Scientists have long been fascinated by amphibian organs. In 1849, Augustus Waller published one of the first scientific studies on frog tongues. The tongue, he wrote, "acts as an agent for seizing prey by being rapidly thrown out of the mouth and enveloping the object to be laid hold of." More than a century later, German researchers watched horned frogs catch bugs with strikes that clocked in at 40 milliseconds. Yet scientists still did not fully understand how frogs could keep their grip on insects during such speedy attacks. They knew the tongues were super-sticky. One 2014 study revealed that a frog tongue could carry objects 1.4 times the animal's own body weight. This gripping power relies on a mechanism that the Los Angeles Times likened to the glue on the back of a Post-it note. Others have compared frog tongues to rolls of sticky transparent tape. Alexis C. Noel is a biomechanics PhD student at the Georgia Institute of Technology. Biomechanics is the study of movement in living organisms. Noel began to wonder if researchers who studied frogs tongues in the past missed something.  Noel had watched a YouTube video of someone's pet African bullfrog playing a mobile game, "Ant Smasher." The real frog was trying to catch fake digital bugs on the game with its tongue. The video made Noel think there must be a trick to the frogs sticky tongue skills. That trick turned out to be frog spit, Noel found. She and her fellow scientists found that frog spit can change physical properties. It transforms from a glue thicker than honey to a thinner fluid and back again. The interaction between this changeable frog saliva and extra-soft frog tongues allows the animals to capture meals incredibly quickly. A frog can grab a fly in the amount of time it takes a human brain to think of and speak a word.  Noel and her team published these findings Monday in a scientific journal. There are a number of differences between frog spit and human spit. The saliva swishing around your teeth and gums helps you moisten and swallow food. It cannot change like frog spit can, though. Humans have salivary glands in the mouth that produce saliva. These are located away from the tongue. The frog tongue itself produces spit. Even when you cut the tongue out of a frog, it will still ooze saliva. Humans produce a lot of spit. According to one estimate, a 5-year-old makes enough spit in a single day to fill a 16-ounce cup. Frogs, on the other hand, do not need much spit. Noel spent several hours squeezing frog tongues just to get one milliliter of saliva she needed for the study.  Frog tongues are also softer than human tongues. "It feels like when you chew a piece of gum for too long," Noel said. It's "soupy and disgusting."  The Georgia Tech researchers compared frog tongues to brains and tongues removed from human bodies. They found that the frog tongues were slightly softer than brains. They are 10 times softer than human tongues, making the frog tongue one of the softest known biological tissues. Noel and her team then watched frogs catch food with high-speed cameras. Noel broke down the attack into three steps.  First, when the tongue slapped into a bug, the tongue deformed and wrapped around the prey. With the force of the impact, the thicker spit turned to liquid. It seeped into the tiny little cracks of the insect's shell. Second, the tongue returned into the mouth. Meanwhile, the spit went back to its thick state. This held the bug in place. If a soft frog tongue is like an elastic bungee cord, Noel compares the human tongue to a stiff rope. The stretchy quality of the frog's tongue helps the frog hold its preynd lessens the extreme force of the strike.  Finally, once it had a bug in its mouth, the frog needed to dislodge its prey from the sticky spit. To do so, the frog pressed down with its eyes. The frog's eyeballs momentarily disappeared into its mouth. This broke the bug free from the sticky tongue and pushed it down into the frog's gullet. The scientists collaborated with the Atlanta Botanical Garden to test seven species of frogs, and all of the frogs had tongue tissue that acted in a similar way. Noel said that recent studies of chameleons show they use a similar mechanism. Sundew plants do too — they feed on captured insects and release a fluid with properties like frog spit, she said. The study offers a better understanding of frog biology at a time when many species are threatened in the wild. Beyond that, Noel sees several possible applications of frog-tongue technology. Maybe it could be made into a new-type of reusable adhesive, she said. Or perhaps in the future we might see frog-like drones capable of picking up packages in the blink of a tongue.