In less than 50 years, the world has lost more than 3 percent of all its frog species, one scientist has determined. What is behind the mass extinctions? Researchers have yet to find out. About 200 frog species have already gone extinct, a new study shows. Hundreds more types of frogs may be dying out. John Alroy is a science professor at Macquarie University in Australia. He discovered that about one in 33 frog species have already disappeared. There are still more than 6,500 frog species left. Most of the frog species have become extinct since the 1970s. If frogs continue to die out at this speed, hundreds more frog species could disappear, he said. Alroy looked at extinction rates to predict the future of reptiles and amphibians. Frogs and salamanders are amphibians. Snakes, lizards, alligators and crocodiles are reptiles. Looking back is an important way of understanding the present and predicting the future. It also shows what in the environment around frogs leads to extinctions. Alroy began the study after a reporter asked him a question. The reporter asked what scientists knew about the number of species that have already gone extinct. "I looked for a paper where they do this, and I didn't find one," Alroy said. He decided he had to write it himself. He chose reptiles and amphibians partly because there was a large amount of information available about them. Another reason was that scientists are worried that frog populations are shrinking in some areas. Alroy used museum collections and papers to discover when an animal was last seen. His study says that about 200 frog species have gone extinct. Hundreds more will be lost over the next century. "So we are on pace to create a mass extinction" around the world, the study says. Over thousands of years, there might be no more frogs. His study also showed that one out of every 14 frogs could be lost in the next century. Reptile and amphibian species are becoming extinct quickly. They are becoming extinct about 10,000 times faster that other life forms. In general, though, frogs had the highest rate of extinction. In fact, frogs are twice as likely to become extinct as snakes and lizards. What surprised Alroy was where the frogs became extinct. Alroy found that many frog species have become extinct in Central America. He also found extinctions in Brazil, Madagascar and New Guinea. Alroy thinks that more frogs are going extinct in the tropics than scientists realize. Scientists do not know what has been causing these extinctions. They seem to have increased in the last 30 years or so. There might be different reasons. One reason could be the destruction of their habitat, while another could be the effects of a deadly fungus on frogs. However, there was not a clear pattern. Some places with high rates of extinction had large amounts of the fungus. In others, scientists do not even know if the fungus was there. This leaves many questions unanswered. Scientists still do not have a clear idea of what's killing off all the frogs. "Honest to goodness, I don't know what's going on," Alroy said. "The pattern seems to be that there are more extinctions in the wet tropics." Alroy said that is not surprising. The tropics have more species than anywhere else. Still he cannot answer the question of why the frogs are becoming extinct. Alroy said that scientists should look at what is going on in different areas. Then they might be able to start taking action to save the frogs. Alroy thinks that scientists often look at the possible effects of climate change. Simply put, climate change is the Earth getting hotter. It affects the oceans and many life forms. He believes that climate change could cause extinctions in the future. However, the frog extinctions have already begun, he said. "I'm not saying we should stop looking at climate change," Alroy said. He is just saying that scientists should look at other causes. "So I'm hoping this paper will encourage more research of that kind."