In less than 50 years, the world has lost more than 3 percent of all its frog species, one scientist has determined. What is behind the mass extinctions? Researchers have yet to find out. Frogs are dying out, a new study says. About 200 different kinds of frogs have already gone extinct. Each kind of frog is a different species. Hundreds more frog species may be next. When a species becomes extinct, it dies out. Thousands of frog species are still left in the world. But scientists are worried that too many are disappearing. John Alroy is a scientist at Macquarie University in Australia. He discovered that most of this has happened since the 1970s. Many studies look at what is happening to species now. Alroy wanted to know what happened in the past. It could help him guess what will happen in the future. Alroy's study started with a question. A reporter wanted to know how many species have become extinct. Alroy could not find the answer. He decided to discover it himself. Alroy looked at reptiles and amphibians. Snakes and lizards are reptiles. Frogs are amphibians. They can live on land or water. There is a lot of information about reptiles and amphibians. It makes them easy to study. Also, scientists are worried about frogs disappearing. Many reptiles and amphibians have become extinct. They are 10,000 times more likely to go extinct than other animals or plants. Frog species are going extinct faster than snakes and lizards. Frogs are twice as likely to become extinct as snakes and lizards. Alroy said frog species are dying out quickly. If it goes on like this, many could disappear, he said. It is possible that a very long time from now all frogs will be gone. Many frog species have already died out in Central America. They have also died out in Brazil, Madagascar and New Guinea. All of these are tropical places. What is killing the frogs? Scientists do not know. There could be different reasons, Alroy said. Scientists want to find these reasons. They need to study what is going on all over the world. Then they might be able to save the frogs. Alroy wants scientists to read his study. He hopes they will do studies of their own.