Frog's fast feast Frogs have a special superpower: their long, sticky tongues. The frog's tongue is quick and deadly. It can grab a tasty bug and pull it into the frog's mouth. Crickets and other insects don't stand a chance.  Scientists have wondered about frog tongues for many years. One of the first studies of frog tongues was done in 1849\. A scientist named Augustus Waller did the study. He wrote that the frog's tongue can wrap around a bug.  Scientists knew that the frog tongue was very sticky. Some compared it to a roll of sticky tape.  They also knew that frog tongues work very fast. The tongue shoots out of the frog's mouth. It can snatch up a bug in an instant. There was something missing, though. Scientists did not know how the tongue holds onto the bug during such a quick attack. Alexis C. Noel decided to find out. She is a scientist at the Georgia Institute of Technology. She studies how animals move. Noel learned there was something special about the frog: its spit. Frog spit can change easily. Sometimes, it is like glue. It can be even thicker than honey. Other times, it changes to a thinner liquid. Then it is more like water. The spit changes back and forth. This helps the frog tongue stick to a bug. Noel and her team watched frogs catch food. They used special high-speed cameras. This helped them understand what happens when a frog catches a bug. The attack happens in three steps.  First, the tongue slaps into a bug. It wraps around the bug. Then the thick, sticky spit gets thinner. It trickles into the tiny cracks in the bug's shell.  Second, the tongue returns to the mouth. The spit gets thick again. This holds the bug in place. Third, the frog removes the bug from the spit. To do this, the frog presses down with its eyes. For a second, the frog's eyeballs disappear. They go down into its mouth. This breaks the bug free from the sticky tongue. It helps push the bug down the frog's throat.  The scientists tested seven types of frogs. All of them had similar tongues. Their tongues caught bugs in the same way. Noel's study will help scientists understand how frogs catch bugs. Many frogs are in danger of disappearing in the wild. So it is important to know more about them.  Noel also thinks we can learn from frog tongues. The way they work could give inventors new ideas. Maybe we could study the spit to make a new sticky substance, she says.