A federal agency wants to protect the amphibians on federal land. But residents of the Sierra Nevada say they fear the land will be sealed off to logging and grazing, hurting the economy. FRESNO, Calif. — Frogs and toads are at the center of a fight in the Sierra Nevada mountains in California. On one side are people who live in the mountains and the Fresno County sheriff. On the other side are U.S. wildlife officials who want to protect the animals under a law called the Endangered Species Act. The people who live in the mountains worry that the protection will “seal off” land to logging, grazing and hiking, and threaten the use of foothill reservoirs. Business will be hurt bad, they say. Fish and Wildlife leaders say they are not planning to shut down forests. “We don’t have the authority to do that,” Fish and Wildlife spokesman Robert Mole said. The government plan proposes labeling some areas a "critical habitat." The idea is to try to minimize or avoid harm to the toads and frog, he said. It would not "block growth" or stop stop people from going into the forest. The animals in question are two groups of the mountain yellow-legged frog and the Yosemite toad. They are being killed by widespread fungus. They are losing the places where they like to live, and fish that eat the frogs and toads have been added to the area. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in April came up with the protection plan. The plan came after years of pressure from people who support nature and its animals. The service also proposed setting aside 1.83 million acres of critical habitat for the amphibians. The areas are considered essential for the frogs and toads to live. But worried people in California asked for a delay. They wanted to make more in-depth comments about the plan. In Fresno County, the mention of the plan reminded people of bad things that happened in the 1990s. The logging industry was hurt by U.S. Forest Service protections for animals like the California spotted owl. The owl was not an [endangered species](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species). But the U.S. Forest Service plans were designed to protect large, old trees. The owls liked to live in the trees. Logging slowed down a lot. Most lumber mills closed in this part of the mountain range. Some California towns were hit hard. Fresno County Sheriff Margaret Mims is the Fresno County Sheriff. She said she is worried about money for the police and public safety. “I don’t want people who live 3,000 miles away dictating what we do,” she said at a public meeting last month. Mims later said she was worried that new or expanding businesses would have more paperwork to do. Fish and Wildlife leaders said they were not invited to the public meeting. They said there may be a misunderstanding about the lands labeled a critical habitat. The label only matters on federal land or projects needing U.S. government permission, spokesman Mole said. The government must be asked in those cases. The Madera Water Bank in California's San Joaquin valley is one example. That project is in the place where the blunt-nosed leopard lizard, Fresno kangaroo rat and other protected animals live. To get the project going, there were studies and added expenses. Land was set aside for the animals. More than 300 types of plants and animals are under federal protection in California. That is the most animals in any state and second-most plants. Supporters of nature and some scientists have been pushing for 10 years to list the Sierra amphibians under the Endangered Species Act. The animals have been dying way too fast over the past 20 years, say biologists. The biggest problems are fish planted in high mountain lakes and a mold-like infection, said scientist Vance Vredenburg. The fish and the infection have wiped out millions of frogs, he said. Chemicals used in farming have also been hurting the frogs, a recent study showed. Many amphibians, including those in the Sierra, may be wiped out around the world because of similar conditions, Vredenburg said. The frogs and toads are an important link in the food chain. They eat insects and are eaten by other creatures. That makes them part of a mountain community that improves air and water quality. The high-mountain meadows and lakes where the frogs live must be protected to give them a chance to live, Vredenburg said. “We need to pay attention to this,” he said. “Amphibians are long-term survivors. They’ve been around more than 300 million years.”