The U.S. wildlife agency wants to protect yellow-legged frogs and Yosemite toads on federal lands in the Sierra Nevada range. But residents say land will be sealed off to logging and grazing. FRESNO, Calif. — Mountain residents and the Fresno County sheriff are squaring off against a federal wildlife agency over frogs and toads in an Endangered Species Act fight that is spreading like wildfire along the Sierra Nevada range. People are reacting to proposed protection for the amphibians, fearing it will “seal off” land to logging, grazing and hiking, and threaten the use of foothill reservoirs. The economy will be devastated, they say. Fish and Wildlife leaders say they are not proposing to shut down forests. “We don’t have the authority to do that,” Fish and Wildlife spokesman Robert Mole said. “The proposed critical habitat does not block growth or restrict access. We’re trying to minimize or avoid impacts on the species.” The species in question are two distinct groups of the mountain yellow-legged frog and the Yosemite toad. They are being killed off by widespread fungus, a loss of their habitat and the addition to the area of fish that eat the frogs and toads. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in April proposed protection under the Endangered Species Act. The proposal came after years of pressure from environmentalists. The service also proposed designating 1.83 million acres of critical habitat for the amphibians. The areas are considered essential for the frogs and toads to survive. But worried people in California asked for a delay so they could make more in-depth comments about the plan. Fish and Wildlife extended the period for the public to submit comments from June to Nov. 18. In Fresno County, the mention of the protections stirred bad memories of the 1990s. The logging industry back then was hurt by U.S. Forest Service protections for such sensitive species as the California spotted owl. The owl was not an [endangered or threatened species](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species). But the U.S. Forest Service plans were designed to protect large, old trees, where the owls liked to live. Logging was dramatically cut back. Most lumber mills shut down in this part of the mountain range. Some California towns were hit hard. Fresno County Sheriff Margaret Mims said last month that she worries that the Endangered Species Act will hurt funding for law enforcement and public safety. “What I don’t want to see is any more damage to the local economy,” she said. “I don’t want people who live 3,000 miles away dictating what we do.” Mims later said she was concerned about the added paperwork for new or expanding businesses. Fish and Wildlife leaders say they were not invited to the Prather meeting. They say there may be a misunderstanding about the 1.83 million acres that are labeled a critical habitat. The label applies only to federal land or projects needing federal permits, spokesman Mole said. Fish and Wildlife must be consulted in those cases. The agency is routinely involved in many kinds of these projects. The Madera Water Bank in California's San Joaquin valley is one example. That project is in the habitat for the protected blunt-nosed leopard lizard, Fresno kangaroo rat, San Joaquin Kit Fox and other protected species. To get the project going, there were studies, added expense and requirements to set aside land for the animals. More than 300 species of plants and animals are under federal protection in California. That is the most animals in any state and second-most plants. Environmentalists and some scientists have been pushing for a decade to list the Sierra amphibians under the Endangered Species Act. The animals have been dying way too fast over the past two decades, say biologists. A government study this month revealed evidence that pesticides used in Central Valley agriculture are somehow drifting up into the Sierra and accumulating in amphibians. The chemicals add to the amphibians’ stress, scientists say. But the biggest problems are fish planted in high mountain lakes and a fungal infection, said scientist Vance Vredenburg, associate professor at San Francisco State University. The fish and the infection have wiped out millions of frogs, he said. Many amphibian species, including those in the Sierra, face extinction around the globe from similar conditions, Vredenburg said. The frogs and toads are an important link in the food chain, consuming insects and providing prey for other creatures. As such, they are part of a mountain community that improves air and water quality. The high-mountain meadows and lakes where the frogs live must be protected to give them a chance at survival, Vredenburg said. “We need to pay attention to this,” he said. “Amphibians are long-term survivors. They’ve been around more than 300 million years.”