Hungry frogs can grab their prey in a flash. Their tongues are strong and sticky, which helps them snatch a meal faster than a blink of an eye. Every animal has to eat and each has a different way of catching its prey. Humans use their hands. Sharks and wolves use their jaws. Frogs are among the few animals that use something much stranger. They use their tongues. To understand just how frogs snatch their snacks, scientists took measurements of the frogs’ tongues in action. It was the first time anyone had done that. They found that certain frogs can lift meals up to three times heavier than their body weight. They use a sticking substance similar to the glue on Post-it notes. Scientists did an experiment using a horned frog. The horned frog is a round South American amphibian with evil-looking "horns" above its eye sockets. Horned frogs like to squat down and wait for prey to wander by. Then they catch their victims with powerful tongues. They tend to stay still, which makes them easy subjects to use in studies. They are also known for their big appetites — they have been caught tackling prey more than half their size. The scientists put glass plates fitted with pressure sensors about an inch from the frogs' faces. Then they placed delicious grasshoppers behind the glass. When the hungry frogs fired their “ballistic tongues” (yes, that’s the real scientific term), the sensors measured their force. Their tongues left behind prints on the glass. These gave scientists an idea of the size of the contact area and the amount of mucus on the tongue. The researchers discovered something about the adhesive, or sticky, force of the frogs’ tongues. They found that it was greater than their body weight by 50 percent. One hungry young frog managed to slam his tongue into the plate with 3.4 times the force of his own weight. “I knew these frogs could eat large things,” said Thomas Kleinteich. He is the lead author of the study and a zoologist in Germany. “But I didn’t really expect that the forces would be that high.” Kleinteich’s discovery may help explain the amazing speed of the frogs’ tongues. They can dart in and out of frogs' mouths in less than a second. “People always think the speed is to catch elusive prey, which makes sense,” said Kleinteich. However, the results give another possible reason for fast-flicking frogs. Greater speed means more power, more adhesion and, ultimately, a bigger meal. This ability to bring in large prey would be a particular help to a sit-and-wait species like the horned frog, said Kiisa Nishikawa. She is an amphibian biologist in Arizona. She was not involved in the study. One meal could be all they need to eat for the whole year, Nishikawa said. She should know. She has a horned frog at home that hasn’t eaten since November, when it went into hibernation for the winter. Kleinteich also wanted to understand how the frogs' tongues work. So he searched for connections between the force of the tongue when it hits, its adhesive strength and the amount of mucus slimed on the plate. He hoped to find out more about frogs’ amazing sticking talent. “The common opinion is that the mucus is some sort of superglue that sticks to everything immediately,” Kleinteich said. But his experiment showed exactly the opposite. Stronger adhesion happened when there was less mucus. Kleinteich thinks how it is sticky because of the pressure the frogs apply with their tongues. It is a lot like what allows sticky tape and labels to cling to a surface and later be removed without a trace. Other adhesives like glue harden to form a permanent bond. But pressure-sensitive adhesives use a substance somewhere between a solid and liquid. It must be fluid enough to form a connection between the surfaces it binds but elastic enough to resist being ripped apart. Like tape, the frogs’ tongues had a greater adhesive strength when they hit the plate with more force. “That’s the pressure part,” Kleinteich said. The way the forces changed as the frogs pulled their tongues back from the plate was another indication. “Imagine you have a piece of sticky tape and you’re pulling on it,” Kleinteich said. “You need a lot of force first to initiate a crack, and then it gets less and less and less.” The force of the frogs freeing their tongues from the plates was similar. Beyond this, Kleinteich doesn’t know exactly what parts of frogs’ tongues do the sticking — this is the topic of his current research. However, the frogs’ version of pressure-sensitive adhesion beats our human-made tape and sticky notes in several ways.