Scientists have discovered a new dinosaur in Argentina. It could be the largest dino ever found. Dreadnoughtus weighed more than a Boeing 737. Scientists say it was too big to be attacked. In a remote part of Argentina scientists have unearthed a remarkably complete skeleton of a new species of dinosaur called Dreadnoughtus schrani. The beast — found in southern Patagonia — was one of the largest creatures ever to have walked the Earth. The hulking dinosaur stood two stories tall at its shoulder and weighed as much as seven Tyrannosaurus rex. It measured 85 feet from head to tail, including its 37-foot-long neck and 30-foot-long muscular tail. Scientists are hesitant to say that Dreadnoughtus is the largest dinosaur species that ever lived, but it is certainly right up there. Its name is a tribute to its gigantic size. “Dreadnought,” which essentially means “fearing nothing,” was the word used to describe a class of mammoth battleships that dominated the high seas in the early 20th century. Nothing could have attacked Dreadnoughtus and won, scientists say, because it was simply too big. The specimen found in Patagonia died sometime between 66 million and 84 million years ago. Based on the size of its thigh bone and upper arm bone, scientists believe it weighed 65 tons — or more than a Boeing 737. What's more, skeletal evidence suggests that at the time of its death, the gargantuan creature was still growing. “There is no doubt that this is among the largest — if not the largest — sauropod dinosaur yet recovered,” said scientist Patrick O’Connor, who was not involved in the discovery. As the sauropod group of dinosaurs includes the largest species of dinosaurs, that makes Dreadnoughtus “among the largest of all dinosaurs,” he said. The giant was discovered by Kenneth Lacovara, who is a paleontologist — a scientist who studies ancient fossils. Lacovara first stumbled on the crumbled remains of the Dreadnoughtus during a fossil-hunting trip in February 2005. “I found a little cluster of broken-up bones and recorded it in my GPS,” said Lacovara. “But I also recorded 10 other sites on my GPS that morning.” Even after realizing that the bones were pieces of a giant thigh bone, Lacovara and his team weren't that excited — at first. “That’s not uncommon,” he said. Then more bones started showing up. "At that point we were getting excited.” The bones themselves were enormous. The animal’s shin bone, for example, was the length of a grown man. The thrilling part, however, was that there were so many bones. “Most sauropods are known by 10 bones,” Lacovara said. “We had 145.” After all the bones were uncovered, the researchers encased them in plaster “jackets” and shipped them by boat to the U.S. It wasn’t until the fossils had been cleaned and reunited at Lacovara’s lab that the researchers discovered they had bones from two different specimens. The fossils will ultimately reside in the Museo Padre Molina in Rio Gallegos, Argentina, not far from where they were discovered. However, the research team has made 3-D scans of all the bones. The scans will allow other scientists to analyze the bones digitally, and, unlike actual bones, they won’t decay over time. Paleontologists are particularly excited about the find because the animals were so well preserved, particularly the larger one. More than 45 percent of that skeleton has been recovered, though its small skull is missing. Having so close to a complete skeleton will allow scientists to better understand how these enormous animals moved around. Dreadnoughtus belonged to a group of dinosaurs known as titanosaurian sauropods. They lived in the Southern Hemisphere during the final 30 million years of the age of the dinosaurs, which ended some 66 million years ago. The animals would have had to eat almost all the time to sustain their colossal bodies. Lacovara imagines them as eating machines that used their long necks to graze on a wide variety of plant life. The area where the fossils were found was once a forest. Several rivers ran through it, and Lacovara believes the two dinosaurs died when one of those rivers broke through its natural levee, turning the solid ground nearby into something like quicksand. Then, these animals sank to their deaths. Their untimely deaths were science’s gain. “The rapid burial is responsible for the extraordinary completeness and beautiful preservation of their bones,” Lacovara said. “We even see muscle scars on many of the bones, and that is because they got buried so fast.” Steve Salisbury, an Australian dinosaur expert, noted that Patagonia has been the site of many important fossil finds. Its ancient landscape made landslides likely and caused the ancient giants to be entombed almost immediately upon death. “We have many opportunities to find those fossilized skeletons as they are exposed naturally via modern-day erosion,” he said. In other words, more big discoveries may be on the way.