Scientists discovered it in Argentina. Nothing could have attacked the Dreadnoughtus and won, the scientists say. It was just too big. Its name means "fearing nothing." In a remote part of Argentina scientists have discovered a remarkably complete skeleton of a new species of dinosaur, Dreadnoughtus schrani. The beast — found in southern Patagonia — was one of the largest creatures ever to have walked the Earth. The hulking dinosaur stood two stories tall at its shoulder and weighed as much as seven Tyrannosaurus rex. It measured 85 feet from head to tail, including its 37-foot-long neck and 30-foot-long tail. Scientists won't quite say that Dreadnoughtus is the largest dinosaur species that ever lived, but it is certainly right up there. Its name is a tribute to its gigantic size. “Dreadnought,” which means “fearing nothing,” was the word used to describe the mammoth battleships that ruled the seas in the early 20th century. Nothing could have attacked Dreadnoughtus and won, scientists say — it was simply too big. The specimen found in Patagonia died sometime between 66 million and 84 million years ago. Scientists believe it weighed 65 tons. The dinosaur weighed more than a Boeing 737 airplane. What's more, at the time of its death, the gigantic creature was still growing. The giant was discovered by Kenneth Lacovara, who is a paleontologist — a scientist who studies ancient animal remains, or fossils. Lacovara first stumbled on the bones of the Dreadnoughtus during a fossil-hunting trip in February 2005. “I found a little cluster of broken-up bones and recorded it in my GPS,” said Lacovara. Even after realizing that the bones were pieces of a giant thigh bone, Lacovara and his team weren't that excited at first. Then more bones started showing up. "At that point we were getting excited,” he said. The bones themselves were enormous — the animal’s shin bone, for example, was the length of a grown man. The thrilling part, however, was that there were so many bones. “Most sauropods are known by 10 bones,” Lacovara said. “We had 145.” After all the bones were dug up, the researchers covered them in plaster and shipped them by boat to the U.S. It wasn’t until the fossils had been cleaned that the researchers discovered they had bones from two different specimens. The fossils will ultimately reside in a museum in Argentina, not far from where they were discovered. However, the research team has made 3-D laser scans of all the bones. The scans will allow other scientists to study the bones digitally. Unlike actual bones, the scanned images won’t decay over time. Paleontologists are particularly excited about the find because the animals were so well preserved, particularly the larger one. More than 45 percent of that skeleton has been recovered, though its small skull is missing. Having an almost complete skeleton will allow scientists to better understand how these enormous animals moved around. Dreadnoughtus belonged to a group of dinosaurs known as titanosaurian sauropods. They lived in the Southern Hemisphere during the final 30 million years of the age of the dinosaurs, which ended about 66 million years ago. The animals would have had to eat almost all the time to sustain their colossal bodies. Lacovara imagines them as eating machines that used their long necks to graze on a wide variety of plant life. The area where the fossils were found was once a forest. Several rivers ran through it, and Lacovara believes the two dinosaurs died when one of those rivers flooded and turned the solid ground nearby into something like quicksand. Then the huge animals probably sank to their deaths. Their early deaths were science’s gain, however. “The rapid burial is responsible for the extraordinary completeness and beautiful preservation of their bones,” Lacovara said. “We even see muscle scars on many of the bones, and that is because they got buried so fast.” Steve Salisbury, an Australian dinosaur expert, noted that Patagonia has been the site of many important fossil finds. In ancient times, the region had numerous landslides and other events that both killed and entombed ancient giants. Under such conditions, skeletons tend to be well preserved. Over time, bits of those those fossilized skeletons are exposed naturally through erosion, he said. In other words, more big discoveries may be on the way.