The Danish zoo killed the animal because it was not needed for breeding. Then its parts were fed to lions. Many question why Copenhagen did not send the giraffe to another zoo. PITTSBURGH — The recent images out of the Copenhagen Zoo were startling. An 18-month-old giraffe lay sprawled on the floor during a public necropsy (an autopsy for animals). Zookeepers examined the body while children and their parents watched. Staff at the Danish zoo euthanized the healthy giraffe, saying it was not needed for breeding. They said its genetic similarity to other giraffes could harm the European population. All plants and animals have genes, which play a large role in what we look like. Genes determine eye color, hair color and many other traits that make us who we are. When an animal species' gene pool is too similar, there is a danger of the entire species going extinct. The giraffe at the Copenhagen Zoo, named Marius, was shot in the head and publicly cut into pieces. Staff then fed the animal to the zoo’s lions, despite offers from other zoos to take the animal. The news outraged many in the United States. Zoos in the U.S., however, say this would not happen in an American facility because accredited zoos have a policy against using animals as food. The Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) oversees more than 200 facilities in the U.S., including the Pittsburgh Zoo &amp; PPG Aquarium. Pittsburgh zoo officials couldn’t be reached for comment. The association monitors animal populations. There are the Population Management Center at the Lincoln Park Zoo in Chicago and the Wildlife Contraception Center at the St. Louis Zoo. Public relations director for the Lincoln Park Zoo, Sharon Dewar, says Europe and the United States have different ideas about how to manage animal populations. “We only breed animals that we are assured can be cared for and housed for the entirety of their natural life,” said Dewar. Executive director of the AZA, Kris Vehrs, released a statement explaining zoos accredited by the association have a number of ways to manage animal populations. “These methods include science-based breeding recommendations and cooperating to plan for adequate space," the statement read. "AZA’s Wildlife Contraception Center and AZA’s Population Management Center help AZA members with the expertise and planning to manage animal populations." The statement ended by acknowledging Copenhagen Zoo's reputation for quality conservation programs, but stressed the zoo associations in Europe and the U.S. have differing animal-management policies. Many questioned why the zoo did not transfer Marius or prescribe contraception to prevent reproduction. The Copenhagen Zoo released a statement on its website outlining its decision. “In Copenhagen Zoo we let the animals breed naturally," said zoo scientific director Bengt Holst in the statement. He explained that this meant the animals breed at the same times they would in the wild. The zoo does not use contraceptives because they produce unwanted side effects on the animals' internal organs. Because of those side effects, the zoo believes it's better for the animal to be euthanized. A statement from the European zoo association said the group “fully supports the decision of the zoo to humanely put the animal down, and believes strongly in the need for genetic and demographic management within populations of animals in human care.” Surgery could be dangerous for a giraffe, explains Joerg Jebram, who oversees the European zoo association's [endangered-species](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species) program for giraffes. Zookeepers would have to sedate the animal to keep it calm during an operation. Sedation causes drowsiness, and it puts giraffes at risk of falling and breaking their necks. The U.S. zoo association evaluates all species every one to three years and advises zoos on whether to breed animals. The breeding recommendations are based on factors including housing availability and population size. If breeding is not advised, zoos can employ a number of contraceptive methods. “It is certainly the philosophy of North American accredited zoos that … for any offspring, we guarantee a sustainable home for its natural life,” said Dewar. Additionally, at the Lincoln Park Zoo, dead animals would never be fed to other animals at the zoo, she said. Other American zoos offered similar sentiments. “We don’t use euthanasia of our animals for population management,” said a spokeswoman for the Columbus Zoo and Aquarium. A spokeswoman for the San Diego Zoo said there are strict guidelines for euthanasia. The practice is only considered for the physical and psychological health of the animal, not for population management. “The goal is always very careful planning,” said Christina Simmons, public relations manager for the zoo. “There are a number of contraceptive options: chemical, surgical and separating animals.” Simmons said the San Diego Zoo places animals in select groups to prevent breeding. These groups are found in nature, but would not reproduce. Examples include single-gender “bachelor groups” and groups with animals past reproductive age. Animal welfare groups also voiced opposition to the Danish zoo’s decision.