Zookeepers said they had to kill the giraffe, named Marius, because its genes were too similar to those other giraffes. U.S. zoos said they wouldn't do something like that. PITTSBURGH — The recent images out of the Copenhagen Zoo were startling. An 18-month-old giraffe lay sprawled on the floor during a public autopsy. Zookeepers opened the body up and examined it while children and their parents watched. Staff at the Danish zoo said they had to kill the giraffe, named Marius, because it could harm the European giraffe population. Its genes were too similar to those of other giraffes. All plants and animals have genes, which play a big part in what we look like. Genes determine eye color, hair color, athletic ability, health and more. When an animal species' gene pool is too similar, there is a danger of the entire species going extinct. Genetics are critical to the health of a species. If all of the animals in a species have similar genes, they may have health problems. If there are genetic differences, some animals will have a chance to adapt to change and survive. Marius the giraffe was shot in the head and then dissected into pieces. Staff then fed the animal to the zoo’s lions, despite offers from other zoos to take the animal. Many people wondered why Copenhagen Zoo did not take other measures to prevent the giraffe from breeding. Staff could have given the animal medicine to prevent mating, or they could have transferred the giraffe to another zoo. Copenhagen Zoo released a statement on its website explaining its decision. “In Copenhagen Zoo we let the animals breed naturally," said Bengt Holst, the zoo's scientific director, in the statement. He explained that the zoo's animals breed at the same times they would in the wild. The zoo does not use medication or surgery to prevent breeding because of possible side effects. Surgery could be dangerous for a giraffe, explains Joerg Jebram. He oversees the European zoo association's [endangered-species](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species) program for giraffes. Zookeepers would have to sedate the animal to keep it calm during an operation. Sedation causes drowsiness and puts giraffes at risk of falling and breaking their neck. The European zoo association said it supports Copenhagen Zoo's decision to put the giraffe down. The association said it "believes strongly" in the need to manage animal gene pools for diversity. Many in the United States were outraged by the giraffe's death. For their part, U.S. zoos say they would never resort to such measures. Public relations director for the Lincoln Park Zoo, Sharon Dewar, says Europe and the United States have different ideas about how to manage animal populations. “We only breed animals that we are assured can be cared for and housed for the entirety of their natural life,” she says. The Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) oversees more than 200 facilities in the United States. AZA evaluates all animal species every one to three years. The group advises zoos on whether or not to breed animals based on housing availability, population size and other factors. If breeding is not advised, zoos can take measures to protect animals. A spokeswoman for the San Diego Zoo said euthanasia is not used for population management in the U.S. The practice is only considered when the physical and psychological health of the animal is at risk. “The goal is always very careful planning,” said Christina Simmons of the San Diego Zoo. There are a number of ways to prevent breeding, she explains. Animals can be given medication or surgery. They can also be separated. Simmons said the San Diego Zoo places animals in select groups to prevent breeding. These groups are found in nature, but would not have babies together. Examples include single-gender groups and groups with animals past reproductive age. Dewar, of Lincoln Park Zoo in Chicago, says that in North America, accredited zoos operate under the same rules. All animal offspring are guaranteed a sustainable home for their natural lives.