The giraffe was named Marius. It was 18 months old. The zoo killed the animal to prevent it from breeding. PITTSBURGH — Many were shocked when the Copenhagen Zoo in Denmark decided it had to end the life of an 18-month-old giraffe. Workers at the Danish zoo said they had no choice. The animal, named Marius, could harm the European giraffe population. Its genes were too much like those of other giraffes. All plants and animals have genes. They play a big part in what animals and plants look and act like. Genes are passed down from parents. They determine eye color, hair color, athletic ability, health and more. If an animal species' genes are too alike, it can be more likely to become sick or have certain problems. The animal species may become weaker. It might not be able to change with its environment. For example, a disease could spread among giraffes. Giraffes that have the same genes may all end up dying of the disease. Giraffes with different genes might be able to stay alive. Many wondered why the zoo did not take other measures to prevent the giraffe from breeding. Zoo workers could have given the animal medication to prevent it from producing offspring. Another possible choice was to transfer Marius to another zoo. The zoo released a statement on its website explaining its decision. “In Copenhagen Zoo we let the animals breed naturally," said Bengt Holst in the statement. He is the zoo's scientific director. He explained that the zoo's animals breed at the same times they would in the wild. The use of medication or an operation to prevent breeding can cause painful problems, so the zoo believes it is better for the animal to be killed. An operation could be dangerous for a giraffe, explains Joerg Jebram. He oversees the European zoo association's [endangered-species](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species) program for giraffes. Zookeepers would have to sedate the animal to keep it calm during an operation. Sedation makes the animal tired, which puts giraffes at risk of falling and breaking their necks. The European zoo association said it supports Copenhagen Zoo's decision to put the giraffe down. The association said it "believes strongly" in protecting animal gene pools. Gene diversity is important to the giraffe population's health. Many in the United States were outraged by the giraffe's death. U.S. zoos said they would never take such action. Sharon Dewar works for the Lincoln Park Zoo in Chicago. She says Europe and the United States have different ideas about how to manage animal populations. “We only breed animals that we are assured can be cared for and housed for the entirety of their natural life,” she says. The Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) oversees more than 200 facilities in the United States. AZA looks at all animal species every one to three years. The group advises zoos on whether or not to mate the animals. The advice is based on housing availability, population size and other factors. If breeding is not advised, zoos can take other measures to protect the animals. A spokeswoman for the San Diego Zoo said putting animals down is not used to keep their numbers under control in the U.S. Its staff only considers putting an animal down it it is suffering. “The goal is always very careful planning,” said Christina Simmons of the San Diego Zoo. There are a number of ways to prevent breeding, she explains. Animals can be given medication or an operation. They can also be separated. Simmons said the San Diego Zoo places animals in select groups to prevent breeding. These groups are found in nature, but would not have babies. Examples include single-gender groups and groups with animals past reproductive age. Dewar of Lincoln Park Zoo in Chicago says that in North America accredited zoos operate under the same rules. All animal offspring are guaranteed a sustainable home for their natural life.