The Copenhagen Zoo said it put down the animal to stop it from having offspring. Some ask why didn't it send the animal to another zoo? PITTSBURGH — The Copenhagen Zoo in Denmark decided recently to put down an 18-month-old giraffe. Workers at the Danish zoo said they had no choice but to kill the giraffe. The reason why is complicated. They said its genes were too much like the genes of other giraffes. All plants and animals have genes. They play a big part in what animals and plants look and act like. Genes are passed down from parents. They determine eye color, hair color, athletic ability, health and more. If an animal species' genes are too alike, it can be more likely to become sick or have certain flaws. The animal species may become weaker. It might not be able to change with its environment. For example, a disease could spread among giraffes. Giraffes that have the same genes may all end up dying from the disease. Giraffes with different genes might be able to stay alive. Many wondered why the zoo killed the giraffe when it had other choices. Workers could have stopped the giraffe from having babies. They also could have moved the animal to another zoo. Copenhagen Zoo released a statement on its website explaining its decision. “In Copenhagen Zoo we let the animals breed naturally," Bengt Holst said in the statement. He works for the zoo. The zoo's animals mate as they would in the wild, he explained. The use of medicine or an operation to stop them from having babies can cause problems. An operation could be dangerous for a giraffe, said Joerg Jebram. He works for the European zoo association. He oversees its [endangered species](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered species) program for giraffes. Zoo workers would have to give the animal medicine to keep it calm. The medicine makes the giraffe drowsy. The effect could also cause the animal to fall and break its neck. The European zoo association said it supports Copenhagen Zoo. It said decision to put the giraffe down was the right one. The association said it "believes strongly" in protecting animal gene pools. Having different genes is important to the giraffe population's health. The giraffe's death outraged many in the United States. U.S. zoos say they would never take such action. Sharon Dewar works for the Lincoln Park Zoo in Chicago. She says Europe and the United States have different ideas about how to protect animal populations. All accredited zoos in North America follow the same rules. Animal offspring are guaranteed a home for their natural life. The Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) oversees more than 200 zoos in the U.S. AZA evaluates animals every one to three years. The group advises zoos on when to breed animals. Decisions are based on housing availability, population size and other things. U.S. zoos do not put an animal down just to control the animal population. Zookeepers only consider doing such a thing when an animal is suffering. “The goal is always very careful planning,” Christina Simmons said. She is a spokeswoman for the San Diego Zoo. There are many ways to prevent breeding. Animals can be given medicine or have an operation. They can also be separated. Simmons said the San Diego Zoo separates animals to prevent breeding. One group might be all female or all male. Another group might be made up of older animals. These older animals can no longer produce offspring. 