Polar bears + grizzlies + climate change = pizzly BARROW, Alaska — People in Alaska and Canada often tell stories about frightening grizzly bears and polar bears. Almost everyone living there has seen one of these creatures. But a mix of the two? Yep. Those are known as pizzlies or grolars. They're a blend of the Arctic white bear and their brown cousins. The animal mix has been turning up more and more in parts of Alaska and Western Canada. Over the past 10 years, scientists have found several bears sharing DNA from both bear types. DNA contains instructions for how an animal grows. Each type of animal has special DNA, which is passed down from parents to their offspring. An animal with DNA from two different animal types is known as a crossbreed. Why are the grizzly bears and polar bears mating with each other? They have no other choice. Instead of not mating at all, the bears are mating with the best possible partners they can find. Both bear types are physically alike and share close territories. One reason the bear types have been mixing is climate change. The Earth is heating up, and changing temperatures have affected the places where animals live. The crossbreeds found in Alaska and Canada are not alone. Scientists have found others in the islands of southeast Alaska. The bears there look like grizzles but have polar bear DNA. The polar-grizzly mix is also not the only new animal crossbreed. A coyote-dog-wolf blend and a lynx-bobcat mix have appeared in North America. The more scientists learn about different animal types, the more they realize how many share DNA, including humans. Many people have some DNA from Neanderthals, a type of early Stone Age man. It was a different species than humans. This means all humans have some Neanderthal DNA. Mixing between different animal types turns out to be very common. Scientists say crossbreeding plays an important part in the futures of endangered animals. In the case of polar bears, it may lead more quickly to their end. Steven Amstrup has studied bears in the Arctic since the 1970s. He thinks the mixing between bear types is better for grizzlies than polar bears. That's because there are more grizzlies than polar bears. Also, grizzly territory is expanding while polar bear territory is shrinking. Andrew Derocher is a Canadian scientist who studies polar bears. He has a gloomy view about where the crossbreeding is going. The grizzly bears will probably push the polar bears out of existence, he said. All crossbreeds that have been studied so far had grizzly fathers. It is because grizzly males move around to establish territory. When they do, they meet female polar bears. On the other hand, polar bear males rarely enter grizzly territory. As a result, the grizzly males do more mating than their Arctic cousins. Grizzly males have even started mating with the polar-grizzly mixes. Their offspring have three-fourths grizzly DNA. Derocher said that as climate change continues, icy Arctic regions will shrink and grizzly bear territory will grow. Grizzly males will keep mating with polar bears and polar-grizzly mixes. Eventually, the Arctic polar bears will be gone. It's impossible to say when that will be. Some experts think that as the Arctic continues warming, it may be less than 100 years away. There are only about 20,000 to 25,000 polar bears left, Derocher said. Right now, polar bears are also threatened by toxic pollution. Eating poisoned food has been linked to brain damage and other problems. And those problems could affect all bear types, including crossbreeds. It will not matter what bear ends up on top if the problems up north are not solved. Crossbreeds are an ordinary way for animals to change over time, Derocher said. Still, if the Arctic ice disappears, there will be bigger problems. He said he worries that it may not be long before there are no more bears in the area at all.