Polar bears + grizzlies + climate change = pizzly BARROW, Alaska — People in Alaska and Canada often share stories of encounters with fearsome grizzlies, even polar bears. Almost everyone living there has seen one of these creatures. But a mix of the two? Those are known as pizzlies or grolars, and they're a blend of the Arctic white bear and their brown cousins. It's a mix that's been turning up more and more in parts of Alaska and Western Canada. Over the past 10 years, scientists have found several bears sharing both species' DNA. DNA is genetic information that contains instructions for what an animal will grow into. It is unique to each species and is passed down from parents to their children. An animal with DNA from two different species, like the polar-grizzly mix, is known as a crossbreed. So why are the grizzly bears and polar bears linking up? They have no other choice. The bears are mating with the best possible partners instead of not mating at all, and they're mating because they share close territories and similar DNA. Mating between the two species happened thousands of years ago, thanks to the advance and retreat of glaciers. As of late, their mixing has been boosted by climate change, the warming of the Earth's atmosphere. The crossbreeds found in Alaska and Canada are not the only ones of their kind. Scientists have found others in the islands of southeast Alaska, where bears resemble grizzlies but contain polar bear DNA. That indicates many years of occasional crossbreeding, said Steven Amstrup, chief scientist at Polar Bears International. The polar-grizzly mix is also far from the only recent animal crossbreed. A coyote-dog-wolf blend and a lynx-bobcat mix have been popping up along the northern Atlantic coast. The more scientists study species' genetic information, the more they realize that animals we label as "pure breeds" actually share DNA, and that includes humans. Many people carry traces of DNA from Neanderthals, a type of early man that lived during the Stone Age. This means humans are crossbreeds. Mixing between species turns out to be much more common than scientists once thought. What may be most surprising about this, researchers say, is the role that crossbreeding plays in the futures of endangered species. In the case of polar bears, it may lead more quickly to their end. Amstrup has studied bears in the Arctic since the 1970s. Like other experts, he believes this "new" bear relationship is better for grizzlies than polar bears. That's because there are more grizzlies than polar bears and because grizzly territory is expanding while polar bear territory is shrinking. As a result, there is a good chance the grizzlies could reduce the polar bear population until it doesn't exist at all. Andrew Derocher is a professor of biological studies at the University of Alberta in Canada. After spending 30 years studying bears throughout the Arctic, he has a gloomy view about where the crossbreeding is heading. "It's quite likely grizzly bears will eat polar bears up, genetically," he said. All crossbreeds that have been studied so far had grizzly fathers. This is because grizzly males roam to establish territory and come in contact with female polar bears. Female grizzles don't usually leave their home ranges, and male polar bears rarely creep into grizzly territory. Polar bears need the ice, where the seals and walruses they feed on live. They don't hibernate like grizzly bears, and they don't travel south of the Arctic. Grizzlies, on the other hand, rarely travel very far north because permafrost is too cold for their liking, and they sink into the snow easily. (Polar bears have padded paws that act as snowshoes.) Hunting is more challenging in the north, where prey is scarce, and grizzly bears are not really swimmers. But shifts are afoot. Grizzly males have started mating with the polar-grizzly mixes. Their offspring are three-fourth grizzlies. As climate change continues, icy Arctic regions will shrink and grizzly bear territory will expand, Derocher said. Grizzly males will keep mating with polar bears and polar-grizzly mixes, further reducing the polar bear population. Eventually, the Arctic white bears will be gone. When will that be? Impossible to say, but some experts think that as the Arctic continues warming, it may be less than a century away. There are only about 20,000 to 25,000 polar bears left, Derocher said. Right now, polar bears are also threatened by toxic pollution. Eating poisoned food has been linked to brain damage and other problems. And those problems could affect polar-grizzly crossbreeds as badly as pure breeds. It won't matter what bear ends up as the Arctic's future top predator, scientists say, if the problems up north aren't solved. Crossbreeds are a "normal part" of how animals change over time, Derocher said. But if the ice disappears, he said, it won't be long before there are no more bears in the area at all.