Polar bears + grizzlies + climate change = pizzly BARROW, Alaska — Most people living in Alaska and Canada have encountered a bear at some point in their lives. They share stories of fearsome grizzlies, even polar bears. But a mix of the two? Those are known as pizzlies or grolars, and they're a blend of the Arctic white bear and their brown cousins. It's a mix that's been turning up more and more in parts of Alaska and Western Canada. Over the past decade, scientists have found several bears sharing both species' DNA, or genetic information. DNA controls how an animal develops and functions and is unique to each animal species. An animal with DNA from two different species, like the polar-grizzly mix, is known as a crossbreed. So why are the grizzly bears and polar bears linking up? It's called flexible mate choice. The bears are mating with the best possible partners instead of not mating at all, and they're mating because they share relatively close territories and the same branches of the evolutionary tree. Mating between the two species happened thousands of years ago, thanks to the advance and retreat of glaciers. As of late, their mixing has been boosted by climate change. Scientists say it's also probably been assisted by government policies that protect both bears from hunting, creating further opportunities for mingling. The crossbreeds found in Alaska and Canada are not the only ones of their kind. Scientists have found others in the islands off southeast Alaska, where bears resemble grizzlies but contain polar bear DNA. That indicates decades of occasional crossbreeding, said Steven Amstrup, chief scientist at Polar Bears International (PBI). The polar-grizzly mix is also far from the only recent animal crossbreed. The coywolf — a coyote-dog-wolf blend — and a lynx-bobcat mix have been popping up along the northern Atlantic coast. The more scientists analyze species' genetic information, the more they realize that animals we label as "pure breeds" actually share DNA, and that includes humans. Many people carry traces of DNA from Neanderthals, a type of primitive man that lived during the Stone Age, which means all humans are crossbreeds. It also means there's no such thing as genetic purity. What may be most surprising about this, researchers say, is the role that crossbreeding plays in the futures of endangered species — or, as the case may be with polar bears, accelerating their end. Amstrup has studied bears in the Arctic since the 1970s and played an important role in helping list the polar bear as a threatened species in 2008\. Like other experts, he believes this "new" bear relationship is more beneficial for grizzlies than polar bears. That's because there are more grizzlies than polar bears and because grizzly territory is expanding while polar bear territory is shrinking. As a result, there is a good chance the grizzlies could thin the polar bear population until it doesn't exist at all. Andrew Derocher, a professor of biological studies at the University of Alberta in Canada, has spent three decades studying bears throughout the Arctic. He has a gloomy view about where the crossbreeding is heading. "I hate to say it, but ... it's quite likely grizzly bears will eat polar bears up, genetically," said Derocher, who believes these changes are already happening. All crossbreeds that have been analyzed so far had grizzly fathers. This is because grizzly males roam to establish territory and come in contact with receptive female polar bears. Female grizzlies tend not to stray from their home ranges, and male polar bears rarely creep into grizzly territory. Polar bears need the ice, where the seals and walruses they feed on live. They don't hibernate like grizzly bears, and they don't travel south of the tundra. Grizzlies, historically, rarely ventured very far north because permafrost is too cold for their liking, and they sink into the snow easily. (Polar bears have padded paws that act as snowshoes.) Hunting is more challenging in the north, where prey is scarce, and grizzly bears are not really swimmers. But shifts are coming. "What we're starting to see in the Canadian Arctic is three-fourth grizzlies," Derocher said, referring to the offspring of 50-50 crossbreeds that then mated with grizzlies. As climate change continues, icy Arctic regions will shrink and the territory friendly to the grizzly bear will expand, Derocher said. "That means a longer warming period and greater food potential." These conditions will make things even worse for polar bears, said Derocher, and eventually the Arctic white bears will be "on their way out." When will that be? Impossible to say, but some experts think that as the Arctic continues warming, it may be only a few decades, perhaps a century. There are only about 20,000 to 25,000 polar bears left, Derocher said. Right now, polar bears are also threatened by toxic pollution that has been linked to brain damage and other problems. And those problems could affect polar-grizzly crossbreeds as much as pure breeds. It won't matter what bear ends up as the Arctic's future top predator, scientists say, if the problems up north aren't solved. Crossbreeds are a "normal part of the evolutionary process," Derocher said. But if the ice disappears, "we won't have grizzlies or polar bears in this area. If you roll the clock ahead another number of decades or a century, quite clearly it's going to be no bears eventually."