Polar bears + grizzlies + climate change = pizzly BARROW, Alaska — In Alaska and Canada, people often see bears. People tell scary stories about them. There are grizzly bears and polar bears. Almost everyone has seen one. A rarer sight is a pizzly or a grolar. This is a mix between a polar bear and a grizzly bear. The animal mix is showing up more and more in Alaska and Canada. The mixed bears have DNA from both kinds of bear. DNA is the basic building block of life. It tells an animal how to grow and work. It is passed from parents to children. Some animals have DNA from two different kinds of animals. These animals are known as crossbreeds. Why are the grizzly bears and polar bears mating? One reason is climate change. The Earth is heating up. This is changing the places where animals live. The ice where polar bears live is melting. Grizzly bears are moving into places that were too cold for them before. The bear crossbreeds in Alaska and Canada are not alone. Scientists have found others on islands near Alaska. The bears there look like grizzlies, but they do have polar bear DNA. Scientists are learning that many kinds of animals share DNA. This includes people. Many people have some DNA from Neanderthals. Neanderthals were a kind of early man. They lived thousands of years ago. Mixing between different kinds of species is common, scientists say. In the case of polar bears, it may lead to their end. Andrew Derocher studies polar bears. He thinks the crossbreeding will make polar bears disappear. Most of the mixed bears have grizzly fathers. This is because grizzly males move around more. When they do, they find female polar bears. Polar bear males move around less. As a result, the grizzly bear males are more likely to become fathers. Climate change is making this worse. The ice where polar bears live is getting smaller. Colder places are warming up. There is more land for grizzly bears. Grizzly males will do more mating. Polar bears will do less. Eventually, the polar bears will start to disappear. There are only a few thousand polar bears left, Derocher said. If the ice melts away, there will be big problems. Derocher worries that the polar bears will soon be gone.