Yellowstone bears are on their own Long ago, the United States had many grizzly bears. Hunters killed many of them. Their environments were also destroyed. Then, the government put them on a list to protect them. It is an endangered species list. The list meant people were not allowed to hunt the bears. Now, there are more grizzly bears. The government says certain grizzly bears do not need as much protection now. It is not worried about grizzlies in Yellowstone National Park. The decision was made by Ryan Zinke. He is in charge of the national parks. He wants grizzly bears taken off of the endangered species list within Yellowstone. They would still be protected outside of Yellowstone. The protected park land is in Idaho, Wyoming and Montana. Several groups do not want the bears taken off of the endangered list. Some are Native American tribes. They feared states would allow bear hunting in the Yellowstone area. Jonathan Proctor works for a conservation group. It wants to protect wildlife. He said that grizzly bears still need protection. The growing Yellowstone bear population shows that we can help, he said. He is worried, though. Taking bears off the list could change things. States might change their laws. “We can’t let the work of saving these bears go down the drain,” Proctor said. Ben Nuvamsa is a former head of the Hopi Native American tribe. He was angry about the list change. He called it a step backward. The grizzly bear has been a religious sign for tribes, he said. The government promised it would have long talks with them, he said. It turns out that was not true, he said. Hilary Cooley works for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. There are about 700 grizzly bears in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, she said. It goes well beyond the park, she said.  She said that in 1975, there were only about 130 bears. The Endangered Species Act helped the grizzly population. Taking the Yellowstone bears off the list will allow the government to help other animals, Cooley said. There are grizzly bears in other places, she said. Those pockets of bears need help, too.