Migrating shorebirds along the U.S. East Coast eat eggs laid by the horseshoe crabs. But there's less food for the birds these days, and the population of shorebirds is dropping. MIAMI — Every spring, thousands of horseshoe crabs make their way ashore when the moon is bright. From Florida to New Jersey, they lay millions of eggs that provide food for migrating shorebirds. But in the 1990s, their numbers began falling. Scientists aren’t sure why but they suspect there are three reasons: fishing, loss of habitat and a global demand for the crabs' sky-blue blood. Their blood is used to check for toxins in injectable drugs. In nature, one thing is almost always connected to another. The falling number of crabs has led to fewer eggs and a major decline in shorebirds that rely on the eggs for food. The crabs’ prime mating season is now underway in Florida and the government is asking the public for help studying them. Researchers hope more information on the crabs' nighttime activities will help them count the crabs and understand their habits. “It’s a really cool creature,” said Tiffany Black, a state biologist at the Sen. George Kirkpatrick Marine Lab in Cedar Key, Fla. “It helps people. But it’s one of these things that’s maligned and overlooked, and the more information the better.” Every spring, Florida's wildlife agency collects numbers on crab sightings around the state. Since 2002, people have reported spotting crabs a total of 2,800 times. That's enough to get an idea about where they may be located, but not enough to tell researchers about populations, Black explained. “If we can get people working regularly, even if just for a few months of the year, from March, on a full moon … that shows us something,” she said. The horseshoe crab is not really a crab at all but a relative of the spider. It is one of the oldest unchanged species on Earth known to scientists. It's older than the continents, and exists only in parts of Asia and North America’s Atlantic coast. For most of the crab's history, the world regarded it as junk from the sea. Bounties were sometimes placed on its helmeted head to stop it from eating clams. And in the mid-1800s, between 1.5 million and 2 million were caught yearly to use as fertilizer and livestock feed. Then in 1956, a biologist working at the Woods Hole Marine Biology Lab discovered something amazing about the crab’s blood. When a crab was infected with a toxin, its blood immediately clotted to isolate the threat. Even if the blood was removed from the crab, the blood would still clot if it detected a toxin. That meant the blood could be used as a “fire alarm” to detect similar threats to humans. As a result, the blood became very valuable and a “bleeding” industry was born. The crabs are caught and their hearts pierced to drain about 30 percent of their blood before they are tossed back into the sea. But in the 1990s, scientists began noticing a sharp decline in a shorebird called the Red Knot. The Red Knot makes a two-week stop along the New Jersey and Delaware shores on its way to the Arctic from Argentina. The birds precisely time their pit stop to when the crabs are spawning so that they can eat the crabs' eggs. The spawning is a carefully choreographed procession toward shore. The males swim parallel to the beach and the females take the more direct approach to shore. When the females cross the “stag line,” they pick up a mate, then tow it in. Males who don’t find a mate may become “satellites.” That means they circle the couple and help fertilize the eggs, according to University of Florida researcher Jane Brockmann, who has spent 25 years studying the crabs in the Cedar Keys National Wildlife Refuge. Each year, the female crab can lay up to 90,000 eggs, creating a feast for the Red Knot. But without the eggs, as a 12-year study by the U.S. Geological Survey found in 2011, the birds are unable to make the second leg of their journey to their Arctic mating grounds. Since the 1990s, their numbers have fallen by 75 percent. The crabs spawn year-round in Florida, although their prime mating season occurs between March and May. Bleeding the crabs for medical purposes likely only accounts for a small part of the falling numbers. Crabs who are bled have a 15 percent chance of dying. But a recent study found that it may slow down the females and make it harder for them to make the long swim toward shore. Catching them for bait or aquariums may have had a larger effect. Until 1998, catches were unregulated and the largest hauls were in the Mid-Atlantic states where the country’s five bleeding companies are located. Then in 1998, the states on the Atlantic coast put a limit on the number of crabs that could be caught. “They basically reduced harvests along the coast to address the fact that birds need the eggs,” said Marin Hawk, who oversees the states' fishing plans.