The number of horseshoe crabs on the Atlantic coast has dropped. That means fewer eggs for birds to eat on the beach. And, because things in nature are connected, that means fewer birds. MIAMI — Horseshoe crabs lay millions of eggs along the Atlantic coast every spring. But each year there are fewer and fewer crabs. In the 1990s, the number of horseshoe crabs began falling. Scientists aren’t sure why but they think there are three reasons. One is fishing. The second is that they are losing their habitat. The third is that people around the world want the crabs' blood. Not only is it a sky-blue color, it can be used to make sure a medicine is safe. The falling number of crabs has led to fewer eggs. And that has led to a big drop in the number of shorebirds that eat these eggs. In Florida, the government is now asking the public for help studying the crabs. Researchers hope this will help them count the crabs and understand their habits. “If we can get people working regularly, even if just for a few months of the year, from March, on a full moon … that shows us something,” said Tiffany Black, the biologist. The horseshoe crab is not really a crab at all. It's a relative of the spider. It is also one of the oldest unchanged species on Earth known to scientists. It's older than the continents. And it lives only in parts of Asia and North America’s Atlantic coast. For years, the world thought the crab was just junk from the sea. In the mid-1800s, between 1.5 million and 2 million were caught every year. They were used as fertilizer and cattle feed. Then in 1956, a biologist discovered something amazing about the crabs' blood. When a crab was poisoned, its blood immediately clotted so that the poison wouldn't spread. Even after the blood was removed from the crab, the blood still clotted if it was poisoned. That means the crabs' blood could be used to check if a medicine was poisonous. As a result, the blood is very valuable. The crabs are caught and their hearts pierced to drain about a third of their blood. Then they are tossed back into the sea. Twenty years ago, scientists noticed a drop in the population of a shorebird called the Red Knot. The Red Knot flies from Argentina to the Arctic every year to mate. It makes a two-week stop along the New Jersey and Delaware shores on the way. The birds time their pit stop to when the crabs are breeding. That way they can eat the crabs' eggs. The crabs breed year-round in Florida. But their main mating season occurs between March and May. Each year, the female crab can lay up to 90,000 eggs. The Red Knot bird needs the eggs for food. Without them, it cannot make the second part of its journey to the Arctic. Since the 1990s, the number of Red Knot birds has fallen by two thirds. About one in six crabs whose blood is removed will die. Bleeding is not the main reason why the number of crabs is falling. But researchers have found that the loss of blood may slow down the females. To mate, the males swim parallel to the beach. The females take the more direct approach to shore. On the way, the females pick up a mate and tow it in to shore. If the female is slower, it is harder for it to make the long swim toward shore.