Shorebirds like the Red Knot eat the eggs laid by horseshoe crabs on the Atlantic coast of the U.S. But there are fewer eggs for the birds to eat because of a drop in horseshoe crabs. MIAMI — Every spring, thousands of horseshoe crabs swim to the shore when the moon is bright. They lay millions of eggs along the coast from Florida to New Jersey. But in the 1990s, the number of horseshoe crabs began falling. Scientists aren’t sure why but they think there are three reasons: fishing, loss of habitat and that people around the world want the crabs' sky-blue blood. That's because the blood is special: it can be used to check for poison in human medicine. The falling number of crabs has led to fewer eggs. That has led to a big drop in the number of shorebirds that rely on the eggs for food. In Florida, the government is now asking the public for help studying the crabs during their main mating season. Researchers hope more information on the crabs will help them understand their habits and count them. “It’s a really cool creature,” said Tiffany Black, a biologist. “It helps people.” Every spring for the last 12 years, Florida has collected numbers on crab sightings around the state. So far, people have reported spotting crabs a total of 2,800 times. That's enough to get an idea about where they may be, but not enough to tell researchers how many there are, Black said. “If we can get people working regularly, even if just for a few months of the year, from March, on a full moon … that shows us something,” she said. The horseshoe crab is not really a crab at all but a relative of the spider. It is one of the oldest unchanged species on Earth known to scientists. It's older than the continents, and exists only in parts of Asia and North America’s Atlantic coast. For most of the crab's history, the world regarded it as junk from the sea. In the mid-1800s, between 1.5 million and 2 million were caught yearly to use as fertilizer and cattle feed. Then in 1956, a biologist discovered something amazing about the crab’s blood: When a crab was poisoned, its blood immediately clotted so that the poison wouldn't spread. Even if the blood was removed from the crab, the blood would still clot if it was poisoned. That means the crabs' blood can be used to check if a human medicine is poisonous. As a result, the blood is very valuable. The crabs are caught and their hearts pierced to drain about a third of their blood before they are tossed back into the sea. But in the 1990s, scientists began noticing a sharp drop in the population of a shorebird called the Red Knot. The Red Knot makes a two-week stop along the New Jersey and Delaware shores on its way to the Arctic from Argentina. The birds time their pit stop to when the crabs are breeding so that they can eat the crabs' eggs. The crabs breed year-round in Florida. But their main mating season occurs between March and May. The crabs' mating ritual works like this: The males swim parallel to the beach and the females take the more direct approach to shore. When their paths cross, the females pick up a mate and tow it in to shore. Males who don’t find a mate may help another couple fertilize their eggs. Each year, the female crab can lay up to 90,000 eggs. That's a feast for the Red Knot bird. But without the eggs, the birds can't make the second leg of their journey to their Arctic mating grounds. Since the 1990s, the number of Red Knot birds has fallen by two thirds. People draining crabs' blood is probably not the main reason the number of horseshoe crabs is falling. Only one in six crabs whose blood is removed will die. But a new study has found that it may slow down the females. That makes it harder for them to make the long swim toward shore to lay their eggs.