Flatworm features toxic slime MIAMI, Fla. — The New Guinea flatworm is not pretty. It has a mouth on its belly, it is covered in toxic goo and it sometimes carries a parasite that can cause brain infections in humans. Just 2 inches long, it is a monster in miniature — and it's invading the United States. Last month, researchers confirmed for the first time that the flatworm is in the U.S. mainland. It was found in in four locations in Florida. There is already concern that the flatworm might spread, and it could threaten South Florida’s native snail population. David Robinson is the nation’s chief malacologist at the U.S. Department of Agriculture. A malacologist is a scientist who studies snails. Even though Robinson is a snail scientist, he finds the New Guinea flatworm disgusting. “As a biologist I can handle most things, but I find this really revolting,” he said. The flatworm is listed as one of the planet’s 100 most invasive species. Species are considered invasive when they move into new areas and throw off the balance of plant and animal life there. If they multiply too quickly, for example, they can quickly wipe out other species or destroy an ecosystem. Experts worry that the New Guinea flatworm could spread in the U.S. “From Miami, the flatworm can go anywhere in Florida and anywhere in the U.S.,” said Jean-Lou Justine. Justine was the lead author of a study about the flatworm published in June. “In the beginning, we are going to find them mainly in gardens because they will be transported from garden to garden,” Justine said of the spread of the flatworm. “The real problem will be if they go into the wild.” The New Guinea flatworm feasts on snails and will eat any slug, worm or soft critter living in soil. It has an elaborate way of making meals out of snails. To get around the snail’s armor, the flatworm latches onto the shell’s opening. It then spits out its own stomach through the mouth on its belly. An acidic goo from the stomach dissolves the snail’s flesh. The flatworm can then re-swallow both stomach and snail. The worm, which is native to New Guinea, has now been documented in 22 countries. Mostly it has been found in island nations. In his study, Justine said the worm was first reported in the United States in Miami in June 2012. Four months later, another sighting was reported in the city. Two years passed before a third worm was reported. The latest discovery was made by Makiri Sei, by accident. Sei is another malacologist, and her office is two doors down from Robinson's. In August 2014, she was in Miami looking for live tropical snails to study their genes. Because it had been dry, another biologist suggested Sei look for snails at night. So at about 4 a.m., she headed to a spot in the garden where the day before she had seen empty snail shells. Instead, Sei discovered a slimy flatworm and snapped a few pictures. “I had no idea what they were,” said Sei, who had been to Florida only once before as a child. Back in Philadelphia, she showed the pictures to Robinson, who suspected Sei had found another flatworm. The New Guinea flatworm is dangerous given how quickly it can spread. It can also carry disease, such as the rat lungworm, a tiny creature that burrows into the brain and can spread to humans. Most people infected with rat lungworm suffer muscle aches and sensitivity to light but recover without ever knowing they have been infected. The New Guinea flatworms are also coated in a toxic goo that can cause allergies, so they should not be handled by humans. The New Guinea flatworm is not the only invasive species. In fact, snails have a history of invading new areas too. Robinson was hired as the first national malacologist in 1995, and, since then, he has seen outbreaks of invasive snails threatening wheat crops in Montana, Detroit and Washington state. “All through the country we have little outbreaks,” he said. “They come in on pretty much everything: cut flowers, imported fruits and vegetables.”