Flatworm features toxic slime MIAMI, Fla. — The New Guinea flatworm is a small worm. It is just 2 inches long. It's not a pretty animal. It has a mouth on its stomach. It is covered in goo. It sometimes has smaller worms living inside it. The flatworm isn't just ugly. It's also dangerous, and it is coming to the United States. Different animals come from different places. When animals come to new places, they might eat other animals and hurt populations. They might not have enough food to eat. They could destroy the nearby environment. Humans have to be careful not to let animals spread to areas where they do not belong. If they sneak onto boats, animals can end up traveling around the world by accident. This is what seems to have happened with the New Guinea flatworm. It is from an island near Australia, but last month it was found in Miami, Florida. If the flatworm spreads, it could do damage. Experts worry that the New Guinea flatworm could spread in the United States. “From Miami, the flatworm can go anywhere in Florida and anywhere in the U.S.,” said Jean-Lou Justine. Justine is a scientist. He helped write a study of the New Guinea flatworm. The study was published in June. His study described how the flatworm might spread. “In the beginning, we are going to find them mainly in gardens because they will be transported from garden to garden,” Justine said. “The real problem will be if they go into the wild.” One creature that might be in danger is the snail. Snails move slowly, so when they are scared, they climb into their shells. The New Guinea flatworm eats snails. To get around the snail’s shell, the flatworm attaches to the shell’s opening. It then spits out its own stomach. A goo from the stomach starts eating the snail. The flatworm can then re-swallow its stomach and the snail. The flatworm has now been found in 22 countries. Mostly it has been found in island nations. In his study, Justine said the worm was first reported in the U.S. in Miami in June 2012. Four months later, another flatworm was seen in the city. Two years passed before a third worm was reported. The latest discovery was made by Makiri Sei. Sei is a scientist who studies snails. One night, she was in Miami looking for snails. Instead, she discovered a slimy flatworm and snapped a few pictures. “I had no idea what they were,” said Sei, who had been to Florida only once before as a child. Back in Philadelphia, she showed the pictures to other scientists. They agreed it was the New Guinea flatworm. The New Guinea flatworm is dangerous given how quickly it can spread. It can also carry disease. Some other tiny creatures can live inside New Guinea flatworms. These creatures can spread to humans and cause illness.