If some fish are getting into Lake Michigan from a canal, then the dangerous Asian carp can too, some say. They want to plug the canal where it meets the Great Lake. MILWAUKEE — The electric fence on the Chicago shipping canal is the last thing stopping a type of dangerous fish from getting into Lake Michigan. It just has one problem: Fish can swim through it. The dangerous fish are called Asian carp. They are a problem because they eat lots of plants and other fishes. The government is trying to prevent them from getting into the Great Lakes. If they get in, they could do great damage. The canal connects the Great Lakes to the Illinois River. The Illinois River then connects to the Mississippi River. Part of the canal is electrified to stop the fish. However, a report by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service revealed that fish can be transported across the fence. They get trapped in the wake, or wave, made by shipping barges when they go through the water. And that wave pulls the fish through the fence and into Lake Michigan. The study also showed that the metal barges can suck electricity out of the water as they go through the fence zone. That creates a moving “bubble” of water. The bubble is free of the electrical current that's supposed to stop the fish. The study also found that small fish are not always stopped by the electrical current in the water. The Army Corps put a camera put into the canal near the fence to check. It regularly captured schools of fish swimming through the fence. In 2011, the Army Corps increased the power of the fence's electricity. It had been concerned that the fence was too weak to stop small fish. The Corps thought that the higher electricity would be strong enough to stop all sizes of fish. The camera told a different story. Crews dropped it in the water 72 different times. Each time it captured 10 minutes of video. Entire schools of fish were recorded swimming through the fence. Of those 72 samples, the fish made it past the fence six out of every 10 times they tried. However, the fish weren't believed to be Asian carp. Government officials do not believe Asian carp are getting past the fence yet. The report said that adult Asian carp are not nearby. The closest were about 55 miles from Lake Michigan. Also, no small Asian carp have been seen closer than 131 miles from the Great Lake. Yet, water samples have been taken near the fence. And they've been taken in parts of the canal on the Lake Michigan side of the fence. They show something different. The samples have regularly shown up Asian carp DNA during the past four years. DNA contains the codes for the cells in animals bodies. It tells cells what to do. There was a poisoning of the canal in the area around the fence in 2009. Afterwards, the body of a single Asian carp turned up. The new study may lead to changes in the use of barges. It might also affect how the fence operates. Safety is also a big concern. The electrified section of canal is about 30 miles downstream from Lake Michigan, in a suburb of Chicago. Some barges traveling through it carry materials that could catch on fire. And sparks could fly between barges. The findings in the report are still fairly new, said Felicia Y. Kirkseyv. She's an expert in invasive fish for the Army Corps in Chicago. She said they're going to do more studying "and work with the barge community and the Coast Guard to see how we can move forward.” Supporters of the Great Lakes want the canal physically plugged. They say it's necessary to stop Asian carp from swimming between the Great Lakes and Mississippi basin. Such a project, however, would need significant upgrades in Chicago’s water system. Josh Mogerman works for the Natural Resources Defense Council. It's a group that tries to protect nature. He said the problems with the electric fence prove that the government has to find a real fix for the Asian carp problem. The electric fence "already had a spotty track record,” he said. The report showed that a physical barrier, or wall, is the only way to stop the “dangerous critters,” he said.