A study showed that small fish easily swim through the barrier. Some worry that the Asian carp could too, and cause havoc in the Great Lakes. MILWAUKEE — The electric barrier on the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal is the last line of defense to stop an Asian carp invasion of Lake Michigan. It just has one problem: Fish can swim through it. Asian carp can be as big as 100 pounds and reproduce quickly. They are a problem because they eat lots of plants and fish and they can damage water quality. The government is trying to prevent them from getting into the Great Lakes where they could do major damage. The canal connects the Great Lakes to the Illinois River, which then connects to the Mississippi River. A report by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service revealed that fish can be transported across the electrified part of the canal when they get trapped in the wake of a barge. Research also shows that the metal barges can essentially suck electricity out of the water as they motor through the barrier zone. That creates a moving “bubble” of water. And it doesn't have the electrical current that's supposed to stop the fish. The study also revealed that small fish are not always stopped by the electrical current in the water. In fact, a camera lowered into the canal at the barrier site regularly captured schools of fish swimming freely through the barrier. The report said that there's a chance that small fish (between 2 and 4 inches in length) could pass the barrier in large groups. In 2011, the Army Corps increased the voltage of the barrier. It had been concerned that the barrier was too weak to stop small fish. Since then, the agency has assumed that the higher voltage was strong enough to stop all sizes of fish. The camera told a different story. Crews dropped it in the water on 72 different occasions. Each time it captured 10 minutes of video. Of those 72 samples, entire schools of fish were recorded swimming through the barrier 61 percent of the time. They weren't believed to be Asian carp, however. Federal officials say they do not believe Asian carp are getting past the barrier. “There is no evidence that Asian carp are bypassing the barriers. Nor is there any indication that Asian carp are in the vicinity of the barriers,” the report stated. The report said that there were no adult Asian carp nearby. The closest found in the Illinois River were about 55 miles from Lake Michigan. And, no small Asian carp have been observed closer than 131 miles from Lake Michigan, it said. Yet water samples have been taken at the barrier site. And they've been taken in stretches of canal on the Lake Michigan side of the barrier. And they show something different. The samples have regularly tested positive for Asian carp DNA during the past four years. And a poisoning of the canal in the area around the barrier in late 2009 turned up the carcass of a single Asian carp. The study may prompt changes in the way barges are configured and how the barrier operates. Safety is also a big concern. The electrified section of canal is about 30 miles downstream from Lake Michigan, in suburban Chicago. Some barges traveling through it carry flammable materials. And the threat of sparks flying between barges is real. The findings in the study are still fairly new, said Felicia Y. Kirkseyv. She's an expert in invasive fish species for the Army Corps in Chicago. She said they're going to do more studying "and work with the barge community and the Coast Guard to see how we can move forward.” The news comes just before the release of another Army Corps study. This new study will examine how to re-establish the natural divide between the Great Lakes and Mississippi River basin. When it opened over 100 years ago, the Chicago canal destroyed that divide. The study is expected to give a range of options. Supporters of the Great Lakes want the canal physically plugged. They say it's necessary to stop Asian carp and other unwanted species from swimming freely between the Great Lakes and Mississippi basin. Such a project would require significant upgrades in Chicago’s sewage treatment and storm-water management. Josh Mogerman is a spokesman for the Natural Resources Defense Council. He said news of the electrical barrier problems was further evidence that the federal government had to find a more permanent solution to the Asian carp problem. “The electric barrier already had a spotty track record,” Mogerman said. He added that the report “seems to burst” any chance it can be considered a solution to the carp invasion. The report "reinforces the broadly held belief that a permanent, physical barrier separating the watersheds is the only way to stop the dozens of dangerous critters queued up on both sides," Mogerman said.