The barrier is supposed to prevent an invasion of Asian carp into the Great Lakes from the Mississippi River basin. But small fish are getting through it. MILWAUKEE — The electric barrier on the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal is the last line of defense to stop an Asian carp invasion of Lake Michigan. It just has one problem: Fish can swim through it. Asian carp can be as big as 100 pounds and reproduce quickly. They are a problem because they eat lots of plants, freshwater mussels and can damage water quality. The government is trying to prevent them from getting into the Great Lakes where they could do major damage. The canal connects the Great Lakes to the Illinois River, which then connects to the Mississippi River. A report by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service revealed that fish can be transported across the electrified part of the canal when they get trapped in the wake of a barge. Research also shows that the metal barges can essentially suck electricity out of the water as they motor through the barrier zone. That creates a moving “bubble” of water that doesn't have the electrical current that's supposed to stop the fish. The study also revealed that small fish are not always incapacitated by the electrical current in the water. In fact, a sonar camera lowered into the canal at the barrier site regularly captured schools of fish swimming freely through the barrier. The report said that the findings showed the potential for small fish (between 2 and 4 inches in length) to pass the barrier in large groups, or schools. Concerned that the barrier was too weak to repel small fish, in 2011 the Army Corps increased its voltage. The agency had assumed that the higher voltage was strong enough to repel all sizes of fish. The camera told a different story. Crews dropped it in the water on 72 different occasions to capture 10 minutes of video each time. Of those 72 samples, entire schools of fish, not believed to be Asian carp, were recorded swimming through the barrier 61 percent of the time. Federal officials stressed they do not believe Asian carp are yet getting past the barrier. “There is no evidence that Asian carp are bypassing the barriers. Nor is there any indication that Asian carp are in the vicinity of the barriers,” the report stated. The report said that the closest adult Asian carp found in the Illinois River were about 55 miles from Lake Michigan. And, no small Asian carp have been observed closer than 131 miles from Lake Michigan. Yet water samples taken at the barrier site and in stretches of canal on the Lake Michigan side of the barrier show something different. They have regularly tested positive for Asian carp DNA during the past four years. And a poisoning of the canal in the area around the barrier in late 2009 yielded the carcass of a single Asian carp. The new study may prompt changes in the way barges are configured and how the barrier operates. Safety is also a big concern. The electrified section of canal is about 30 miles downstream from Lake Michigan, in suburban Chicago. Some barges traveling through it carry flammable materials. And the threat of sparks flying between barges is real. The findings are still fairly new, Felicia Y. Kirkseyv said of the study. She's the aquatic invasive species program manager for the Army Corps in Chicago. “We’re going to do more analysis and work with the barge community and the Coast Guard to see how we can move forward.” The news comes just before the Jan. 6 release of the Army Corps’ $25 million study examining how to re-establish the natural divide between the Great Lakes and Mississippi River basin. When it opened over 100 years ago, the Chicago canal destroyed that divide. The study is expected to have a range of options. But, Great Lakes advocates want the canal physically plugged to stop Asian carp and other unwanted species from swimming freely between the Great Lakes and Mississippi basin. Such a project would require significant upgrades in Chicago’s sewage treatment and storm-water management. Josh Mogerman is a spokesman for the Natural Resources Defense Council. He said news of the electrical barrier problems is further evidence that the federal government has to find a more permanent solution to the Asian carp problem. “The electric barrier already had a spotty track record, but this report seems to burst any remaining implication it can be considered a solution to the carp invasion,” he said. “It reinforces the broadly held belief that a permanent, physical barrier separating the watersheds is the only way to stop the dozens of dangerous critters queued up on both sides.”