Back in 1985, someone dumped a fish tank of lionfish in the ocean off Florida. They spread up to North Carolina and down to the Bahamas, and have now invaded the Gulf of Mexico. GALVESTON, Texas — It sounds like a horror movie: A beautiful type of fish sweeps into the Gulf of Mexico. But its spines are poisonous and it's very hungry. It gobbles up everything in its path. Unfortunately for the native fish of the Gulf, the attack is very real. Lionfish are native to the South Pacific. They first showed up off the coast of southern Florida in 1985. Most likely, someone dumped a few out of a home fish tank. Since then, the fish have spread out to the Eastern seaboard and down to the Bahamas. They breed frequently and have no natural enemies. Thanks to that, lionfish are more common now in the Bahamas than in their home waters. "Lionfish have been nearly a perfect predator,” says Martha Klitzkie. She works at the Reef Environmental Education Foundation (REEF) in Florida. “They’re moving into new areas and, when they get settled, the population increases pretty quickly.” The number of lionfish grew rapidly in the Florida Keys and the Bahamas in the past couple of years. Meanwhile, the number of native prey fish dropped sharply. Lionfish first appeared in the western Gulf of Mexico in 2010. Scientists spotted them in the Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary. Garden Banks is a protected area about 100 miles off the Texas coast. Now scuba divers spot them nearly every time they explore a reef. Michelle Johnston is a government scientist monitoring fish in Galveston. She says that there too many lionfish. Yet, to control their numbers is very difficult. "It's kind of this impossible battle." Lionfish are interesting and beautiful. They grow to about 18 inches and have venomous spines. Their brown-and-white stripes are like those of a zebra. Lionfish hang near coral heads or underwater structures where reef fish flourish. They wait for prey fish to draw near. Then they gulp them down in a flash. The fish can start making babies within one year. A single female can pump out 2 million eggs a year. Lionfish live about 15 years. Predators and disease keep lionfish in check in the South Pacific. But here, other fish don't like them as food. The few groupers that have been seen tasting lionfish have spit them back out. The lionfish eat almost anything. They eat fish half their own size. They’re eating so much, that scientists say some are getting too fat. They can live almost anywhere in the water. They like little openings and holes. They find those places in coral heads, drilling platforms and sunken ships. “As long as they have something to eat, they’ll be there,” Johnston says. Too many lionfish can cause problems. In the Gulf, lionfish are eating the fish that keep the reefs clean. Without the fish, the coral and the reef may die. Klitzkie at REEF says there's no way to get rid of all the lionfish. But their numbers can be controlled. One way is simply to take them out of the water. Lionfish fishing tournaments are popping up around the Caribbean and the Gulf. People are encouraged to catch and kill the fish. In some places, they cook them up. The tournaments have removed more than 12,000 lionfish since 2009. In the Gulf, scientists like Johnston have special permits that allow them to remove lionfish. But they need more help. And that takes divers, boats and money. "It's really an uphill battle," she says. “The second you stop, they come back.”