If the fence isn't stopping small fish, it might not be able to stop an invasion of the Great Lakes by a dangerous fish called the Asian carp, say some who want a wall built. MILWAUKEE — An electric fence on the Chicago shipping canal is the last thing stopping a dangerous kind of fish from getting into Lake Michigan. It just has one problem: Fish can swim through it. The dangerous fish are called Asian carp. They are a problem because they eat so much. They eat lots of plants and fish. The government is trying to prevent them from getting into the Great Lakes. If they do get in, they could do great damage. The canal connects the Great Lakes to the Mississippi River system. Part of the canal is electrified to stop the fish. Still, a report by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers showed that fish can get through the fence. They get trapped in the wave made by shipping boats called barges. They make a wave when they go through the water. And the wave pulls the fish through the fence. The study also showed that the metal barges can suck electricity out of the water. It happens as they go through the fence zone. It creates a moving “bubble” of water. And it doesn't have the electricity that's supposed to stop the fish. The study also found that small fish sometimes get through the fence. They are not always stopped by the electricity in the water. The Army Corps put a camera into the canal near the fence to check. It saw schools of fish swimming through the fence. In 2011, the Army Corps increased the power of the fence's electricity. It was worried that the fence was too weak. Small fish might be able to get through. The Corps thought that the higher amount of electricity would be stronger. Then it could stop all sizes of fish. The camera told a different story. Crews dropped it in the water 72 different times. Each time it captured 10 minutes of video. Entire schools of fish were seen swimming through the fence. The fish made it past the fence six out of every 10 times they tried. The fish weren't believed to be Asian carp. Government officials don't think carp are getting past the fence. The report said that the closest adult Asian carp are far away. They are about 55 miles from Lake Michigan. Also, no small Asian carp have been seen close either. The closest have been found 131 miles from Lake Michigan. Yet, water samples have been taken near the fence. And they've been taken in the canal on the Lake Michigan side of the fence. They show something different. The samples have regularly shown Asian carp DNA during the past four years. DNA contains the codes for the cells in animals bodies. The new study may lead to changes in the use of barges. It might also affect how the fence operates. Safety is also a big concern. The electrified section of canal is about 30 miles downstream from Lake Michigan. That's in a suburb of Chicago. Some barges traveling through it carry materials that could catch on fire. And sparks could fly between barges. Some people don't like the electric fence. They want the canal physically plugged. They say it's necessary to stop the Asian carp. Josh Mogerman works for the Natural Resources Defense Council. It's a group that tries to protect nature. He said the problems with the electric fence are serious. And the study proved that the government needs a real fix for the carp problem. He says that a physical barrier, or wall, is the only way to stop the “dangerous critters” from getting into Lake Michigan.