Scientists know every animal with a brain needs sleep. How about animals with no brain? Students at Caltech tested jellyfish and learned that even these simple animals without brains need sleep. It was after midnight when Michael Abrams, Claire Bedbrook and Ravi Nath crept into the Caltech lab where their jellyfish were kept. They left the lights off and walked through the room by the glow of their cellphones. The students did not tell told anyone that they were doing this. The secret they were keeping was a "totally crazy" experiment. The experiment was to determine whether jellyfish sleep. The three science students were having coffee one day, and started debating whether jellyfish needed to sleep. "Of course not," Bedbrook said. The others weren't so sure, but they wanted to find out. Scientists still don't fully know why animals need to sleep. They have found that sleep helps strengthen memory and keep the brain healthy. Jellyfish are so simple they don't even have brains. How could they possibly share the need to sleep? Months of late-night studying have caused Bedbrook to change her mind. She wrote a new paper with Nath and Abrams. It reports that the upside-down jellyfish Cassiopea shows sleeplike behavior. This makes it the first animal without a brain known to do so. The results suggest that sleep evolved early in the history of animal life and has stuck with us ever since. Animals likely would have evolved a way to live without sleep if they could. After all, a sleeping animal might get attacked by a predator. It might miss a chance to find food. But many experiments suggest that when animals such as mice go without sleep for too long, they die. Scientists have shown that even a simple roundworm with a very small brain needs sleep to survive. Cassiopea has no brain to speak of. Instead, they have a "net" of nerve cells across their squishy bodies. These jellyfish hardly even act like animals. Instead of mouths, they suck in food through holes in their tentacles. They're also ancient. The jellyfish group of animals first arose about 700 million years ago, making them some of Earth's first animals. These traits make Cassiopea a perfect animal to test for understanding how sleep began. The three students designed an experiment to test different behaviors and see if the jellyfish were asleep. They watched the animals to see how they moved, and to see if they could get the jellies' attention when they were resting. It turned out that the jellyfish moved about 30 percent less at night. It was also harder to get their attention. The students still needed to prove that the jellyfish feel a need to sleep. They needed to show that the jellies feel bad when they don't sleep, like people do when we stay up too late. The scientists stopped the jellyfish from sleeping by "poking" them with streams of water. They did this every 20 minutes for an entire night. The next day, the poor animals were dazed. They swam around more slowly than usual. The next night, they slept more deeply than usual to make up for lost slumber. Soon after, the students told their professors about what they were doing. The head of the Caltech lab where Nath worked, the scientist Paul Sternberg, said he thought the work was important. We think of jellyfish as being very simple, but in fact, they might be less simple than we thought. A scientist named Allan Pack studies sleep and how different parts of our bodies send signals to each other. He said that understanding why jellyfish need sleep could help scientists to find out why humans need sleep too. After all, we spend a third of our lives sleeping. But why are we doing it? What's the point?