Scientists know every animal with a brain needs sleep. How about animals with no brain? Students at Caltech tested jellyfish and learned that even these simple animals without brains need sleep. It was after midnight when Michael Abrams, Claire Bedbrook and Ravi Nath crept into the science lab. They came to check on their jellyfish. They left the lights off and used the glow of their cellphones to walk through the room. The students hadn't told anyone what they were doing. It was a secret. Their secret was a "totally crazy" experiment. The experiment was to find out whether jellyfish sleep. "Of course not," Bedbrook said when the three college science students talked about it. The others weren't so sure, but they wanted to find out. Scientists still don't fully know why animals need to sleep. They have found that sleep helps to keep the brain healthy. Jellyfish are so simple they don't even have brains. How could they possibly share the need to sleep? Months of late-night studying have caused Bedbrook to change her mind. She wrote a new paper with Nath and Abrams. It reports that a type of jellyfish shows signs of sleeping. This makes it the first animal without a brain known to do so. The finding shows that sleep began early in the history of animal life and has stuck with us ever since. Animals probably would have evolved to live without sleep if they could. After all, a sleeping animal might get attacked by a predator. It might miss a chance to find food. But many experiments show that when animals such as mice go without sleep for too long, they die. Scientists have shown that even a simple worm with a very small brain needs sleep to survive. The jellyfish that the students studied have no brains. Instead, they have a "net" of nerve cells across their squishy bodies. These jellyfish hardly even act like animals. Instead of mouths, they eat food through holes in their tentacles. They're also very old. The jellyfish group of animals first showed up about 700 million years ago. This makes them some of Earth's first animals. That's why they are perfect animals to test to learn about how sleep began. The three students made up an experiment to see if the jellyfish were asleep. They watched the animals to see how they moved. They also wanted to see if they could get the jellies' attention when they were resting. It turned out that the jellyfish moved less at night. It was also harder to get their attention. People and other animals start to feel tired when they don't get enough sleep. The students needed to show that jellyfish are the same way. They stopped the jellyfish from sleeping by "poking" them with streams of water. They did this every 20 minutes for a whole night. The next day, the animals swam around more slowly than usual. The next night, they slept more deeply than usual to make up for lost slumber. Soon after, the students told their professors about what they were doing. The head of the lab where Nath worked said he thought the work was important. We think of jellyfish as being very simple. In fact, they might be less simple than we thought. A scientist named Allan Pack studies sleep and how different parts of our bodies send signals to each other. He said that understanding why jellyfish need sleep could help scientists to find out why humans need sleep too. After all, we spend a third of our lives sleeping. But why are we doing it? What's the point?