Scientists know every animal with a brain needs sleep. How about animals with no brain? Students at Caltech tested jellyfish and learned that even these simple animals without brains need sleep. It was late at night when Michael Abrams, Claire Bedbrook and Ravi Nath sneaked into the lab. They came to see their jellyfish. The students hadn't told anyone that they were doing this. They were working on a "totally crazy" test in secret. The test was to find out if jellyfish sleep. The three science students were having coffee one day. One of them wondered whether jellyfish sleep. "Of course not," Bedbrook said.  The others weren't so sure. They wanted to find out, to see who was right. Scientists still don't know for sure why animals need to sleep. They have found that sleep helps to keep the brain healthy. Jellyfish are so simple they don't even have brains. How could they possibly need to sleep? Studying has caused Bedbrook to change her mind. She wrote a paper with Nath and Abrams. It says that a kind of jellyfish shows signs of sleeping. This makes it the first animal without a brain known to sleep. Animals probably would have changed to live without sleep if they could. After all, sleep can be risky. A sleeping animal might get attacked by another animal. It might miss a chance to find food. But tests show that sleep is important, and animals can die if they don't sleep. Even a worm with a small brain needs sleep to live. The jellyfish have no brains. They're also one of the oldest kinds of animals on Earth. That's why they are perfect to help us learn about how sleep began. The students made up a test to see if the jellyfish sleep. People start to feel tired if we don't get enough sleep. The students needed to show that jellyfish are the same way. They stopped the jellyfish from sleeping by "poking" them with streams of water. They did this for a whole night. The animals were dazed the next day, and they swam around more slowly than usual. They slept more the next night. The students told their teachers about what they were doing. One teacher said the work was important. We think of jellyfish as being very simple. They might be less simple than we thought. Another scientist said that understanding why jellyfish need sleep could help us to find out why humans need sleep too. After all, we spend a third of our lives sleeping. But why are we doing it? What's the point? Scientists will keep studying to learn more.