Scientists know every animal with a brain needs sleep. How about animals with no brain? Students at Caltech tested jellyfish and learned that even these simple animals without brains need sleep. It was after midnight when Michael Abrams, Claire Bedbrook and Ravi Nath crept into the Caltech lab where they were keeping their jellyfish. They kept the lights off and navigated the room by the pale blue glow of their cellphones. The students hadn't told anyone that they were doing this. "When you start working on something totally crazy, it's good to get data before you tell anybody," Abrams said. The "totally crazy" experiment was to determine whether jellyfish sleep. "Of course not," Bedbrook said when the three science students had a debate about it. The others weren't so sure, but the topic was weird enough that they wanted to study it more. Scientists still don't fully know why animals need to snooze, but research has found that sleep helps strengthen memory and keep the brain healthy. Jellyfish are such simple animals they don't even have brains. How could they possibly share this mysterious trait? Months of late-night research have caused Bedbrook to change her mind. In a new scientific paper, she, Nath and Abrams report that the upside-down jellyfish Cassiopea shows sleeplike behavior. This makes it the first animal without a brain known to do so. The results suggest that sleep evolved early in the history of animal life and has stuck with us ever since. "We know it must be very important. Otherwise, we would just lose it," Bedbrook said. Think about it, Nath said. If you're asleep in the wild when a predator comes along, you're dead. If a food source strolls past, you go hungry. If a potential mate walks by, you miss the chance to have a child. If animals could evolve a way to live without sleep, surely they would have. But many experiments suggest that when animals such as mice are deprived of sleep for too long, they die. Scientists have shown that even a simple roundworm with a very small brain needs sleep to survive. Cassiopea has no brain to speak of. Instead, they have a "net" of nerve cells across their small, squishy bodies. These jellyfish barely even behave like animals. Instead of mouths, they suck in food through pores in their tentacles. They're also ancient. Jellyfishes' group of species first arose about 700 million years ago, making them some of Earth's first animals. These traits make Cassiopea an ideal animal to test for the evolutionary origins of sleep. So the three students designed an experiment. At night, when the jellies were resting, the students would test for three behaviors to see if the jellyfish were asleep. First, the jellyfish must become inactive. The researchers counted the jellyfishes' movements and found they were 30 percent less active at night. But when food was dropped into the tank, the creatures perked right up. This shows that they were inactive because they were sleeping, not because they had a problem moving. Second, it must become more difficult to get the animals' attention. They have to be "woken up." For this, the researchers placed sleeping jellies in containers with removable bottoms, lifted the containers to the top of their tank, then pulled out the bottom. If the jellyfish were awake, they'd immediately swim to the floor of the tank. But if they were asleep, "they'd kind of strangely float around in the water," Abrams said. Finally, the jellyfish must feel a need to sleep, and when they don't, they suffer. "This is really equivalent to how we feel when we pull an all-nighter," Bedbrook said. The scientists prevented the jellyfish from sleeping by "poking" them with pulses of water every 20 minutes for an entire night. The following day, the poor creatures swam around in a daze, and the next night they slept especially deeply to make up for lost slumber. Soon after, the students told their professors about what they were doing. The head of the Caltech lab where Nath worked, the scientist Paul Sternberg, said he thought the work was important. We think of jellyfish as being very simple, but in fact they might be more complex than we thought. A Pennsylvania scientist named Allan Pack studies sleep and how different parts of our bodies send signals to each other. He's not surprised by the finding, given how common sleep is in other species. Understanding why jellyfish need sleep could lead scientists to better understand why humans need sleep too. After all, we spend a third of our lives sleeping, but why are we doing it? What's the point?