Some pet snakes from California got loose on the Canary Islands. Thousands are slithering around now. Islanders are fighting to control them before they eat all the local wildlife. A type of California kingsnake that is popular as a pet has overrun the Canary Islands. The snakes have multiplied and are killing off the island's own bird, mammal and lizard species. The Canary Islands were once a stable ecology northwest of Africa.Yet now the native animals are being killed because they have had no time to develop ways of avoiding the snakes. The kingsnake population has exploded because it has no natural predators on the island, say U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) biologists. They are helping the Spanish islands' attempt to control the highly adaptive and secretive predators. “The kingsnakes in question are from a species found in San Diego," said Robert Fisher. He is a research biologist with the USGS. “Some of their offspring wound up in the Canary Islands via the international pet trade, and then got loose." Now the population of snakes is "going through the roof," he said. Fisher is among three U.S. experts heading to the Canary Islands in May. They will advise scientists and government officials on the behavior of the snakes that first raised alarms in 2007. They will also point out possible weaknesses in the snakes. Since 2007, the number of kingsnakes has grown enormously. There are now thousands per square mile in the eastern and northwestern portions of Gran Canaria. The 602-square-mile volcanic island has become a place of safety for the kingsnake because of its mild temperatures, moist ocean air and land rich in prey that never learned to fear snakes. Dogs and hawks have been used in organized assaults against the snakes. So far, fewer than 2,000 have been snared. Most of those were discovered slithering over the ground. “The trouble is, these snakes spend much of their lives beneath the ground,” said Robert Reed. He is an expert on invasive species with the USGS. “So my message to people in the Canaries will be this: The fact that you’re removing hundreds of visible snakes means, unfortunately, that it is likely that there are many, many thousands more out there you can’t see.” Brian Hinds is president of a group that studies snakes and other reptiles. He will arrive in Gran Canaria with proposals for dealing with what he described as a “monumental task.” Among them: plowing up infested areas with earth movers. “They need to strike back hard and fast,” said Hinds, who says he has personally captured more than 3,000 California kingsnakes. “They’re not called kingsnakes for nothing.” The Canary Islands are another example of what can happen when an invasive snake gets a foothold in an otherwise balanced ecosystem, or biological community. Brown tree snakes have established themselves in the Pacific island of Guam. The Florida Everglades have been invaded by Burmese pythons. The venomous wolf snake was introduced to the Indian Ocean island of Mauritius. The California kingsnake is known in scientific texts as Lampropeltis getula californiae. The snakes in the Canary Islands are roughly 30 percent larger than their wild counterparts in Southern California. “They’ll be eating any lizard they can fit in their mouths,” Reed said. Canary Island biologists fear that the snakes may be nibbling three native species to death. They think those species of gecko, skink and giant lizard could be wiped out by the kingsnakes. A 2012 study funded by the European Union said it was likely the kingsnake could spread to the other islands. The study was published by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. “This snake will quite possibly impact the local reptilian population to the point where we see their total disappearance," the study said. Canary Island officials hope to eventually reduce their numbers by half, if possible. “Most control programs for invasive reptiles are initiated long after the problem has gotten out of hand,” Reed said. “Unfortunately, this sort of thing will probably become more common as international borders fall, incomes rise and more people get interested in owning exotic pets.”