Local animals had never seen a California kingsnake. Then some pet snakes got loose and started eating them. Now the Canary Islanders must fight to keep the snakes under control. The Canary Islands have a snake problem. The problem is there are a lot of them. They are taking over. And they are killing off the local animals. The islands lie off the coast of northwestern Africa. The snakes are from North America and are called California kingsnakes. The local animals have had no time to learn how to avoid the snakes. Doing this would take a very long time. The kingsnake population has exploded on the islands, say U.S. government scientists. The reason is there are no local animals that can control the snakes. The scientists are trying to help. But the snakes are very secretive and can change with their surroundings. The kingsnakes are usually found in San Diego, said Robert Fisher. He is a U.S. government scientist. Some of their snakes were sold as pets in the Canary Islands. Then they got loose, he said. Now the number of snakes is "going through the roof," he said. Fisher is one of three U.S. experts heading to the Canary Islands. They are going to try to help with the problem. People were first worried about the snakes in 2007. Since then, the number of kingsnakes has grown a lot. There are now thousands and thousands on parts of the island of Gran Canaria. The island has become a place of safety for the kingsnakes. They like the warm weather and wet ocean air. The land is also full of animals that never learned to fear snakes. Dogs and hawks have been used against the snakes. So far, fewer than 2,000 have been captured. Most of those were discovered slithering over the ground. “The trouble is, these snakes spend much of their lives beneath the ground,” said Robert Reed. That means that there are "many, many thousands more out there you can’t see.” Reed is an expert on invasive species. Those are animals that take over an area where they do not belong. Brian Hinds is president of a group that studies snakes and other reptiles. He is going to Gran Canaria. Hinds has plans for dealing with the snakes. Among them: digging up the ground with machines. “They need to strike back hard and fast,” said Hinds. He says he has personally captured more than 3,000 California kingsnakes. The Canary Islands are an example of what can happen when an invasive snake gets into a biological community. It upsets the balance of life in the community. It has happened in other places, too. Brown tree snakes have settled in the Pacific island of Guam. Burmese pythons invaded the Florida Everglades. The wolf snake was introduced to the island of Mauritius in the Indian Ocean. The snakes in the Canary Islands are bigger than usual. They are almost a third larger than the wild kingsnakes in Southern California. “They’ll be eating any lizard they can fit in their mouths,” Reed said. Canary Island scientists fear that the snakes may be eating three native species. Those animals are the gecko, skink and giant lizard. Scientists worry that the snakes could wipe those animals out. A 2012 study said it was likely the kingsnake could spread to the other islands. The snake could wipe out local reptiles, the report said. Canary Island officials hope to some day lower their numbers by half, if possible. Reed said the problem with invasive species is likely to get worse. It will happen more often as people have more money and get interested in owning unusual pets, he said.