The tiny island of St. Vincent in the Caribbean Sea is the only place in the Americas that allows harpooning whales by hand. Many want it stopped. BEQUIA, St. Vincent — It’s whale-hunting season in St. Vincent. But there have been few whale sightings near the tiny Caribbean nation. And none have been captured. The Caribbean islands are off the southern tip of the U.S. in the Caribbean Sea. “I don’t think we’re going to go out today,” says whale hunter Kingsley Stowe. He is a proud defender of whaling, which is close to disappearing. Whaling was once a big business in Bequia. The island's name is pronounced BECK-way. It is part of St. Vincent. There used to be at least a dozen whale boats there. But that was before the world limited how many whales could be caught. In 1986, most whaling was outlawed. So many whales were killed around the world that whales were dying out. Now, Bequia is the only place in the Americas that still allows harpooning whales by hand. When whale hunters harpoon a whale, they stab it with a long spear. Islanders are allowed to kill up to four whales during whale season. It lasts from February to May. So far, the only humpback whale that was hunted got away. “It’s like carnival when you catch a whale,” says Stowe, standing next to his whale boat called Persecution. Stowe inspected the brass tip of a wooden harpoon, which looks like a spear. “But we don’t kill whales for joke. We kill whales for food.” Many people are pushing to end whale hunting. They say St. Vincent should watch whales, not hunt them. “Harpooning whales in St. Vincent ... should be a thing of the past,” says Gaston Bess. Bess hunted whales for 30 years until he quit last year. “People should get excited and get their children excited in watching the whales in their natural (home) and protecting them.” Bess decided to stop hunting during a whale watching trip. He saw the beauty of the whales. He was also touched by how whale mothers cared for their babies. “Watching them took my breath away,” says Bess. It's far different when some of the people of Bequia spot a whale’s water spout. People jump in their boats and get near the whale. The captain brings the boat between the whale’s head and tail. Then the harpooner strikes. He is only about seven feet from the whale's head. Today, whaling is under pressure to stop. The International Court of Justice stopped Japan from hunting whales in the Antarctic. Japan claims it kills the whales as part of science research. Anti-whalers argue that there is nothing scientific about Japan’s hunts. They also say there's no reason for whaling in Bequia. The citizens of Bequia like the taste of whale meat. They also use the oil from the whale blubber. But they don't really need whale meat or oil to live, said Louise Mitchell. She is in charge of an anti-whaling group. Today, she says, the few remaining whalers “are holding onto it because it is a tradition. It’s a passion that they have. It’s something they are used to doing and people don’t like change.” Mitchell is the daughter of James Mitchell. He led the government of St. Vincent in the 1980s. He used to support whaling. But he changed his mind after a whale watching trip. Louise Mitchell said whaling used to be part of Bequia. Now whalers often fight over who killed a whale. People also steal the whale meat. In 2012, the International Whaling Commission said Bequia can hunt whales for six more years. It is concerned, though, that the whales are killed in a cruel way. Also, baby whales are used to catch their mothers. The commission doesn't like that they sell whale meat. Back at the beach, huge whale bones serve as stair rails leading to the water. Stowe says the whales will come back. “If we don’t have whaling, what else is there to do?” he says. “As my son said the other day, the only whale I want to watch is the one on my plate.”