The tiny island of St. Vincent is the only place in the Americas where whale harpooning by hand is still allowed. Many are pushing for the island to end whaling. BEQUIA, St. Vincent — It’s whale-hunting season on St. Vincent, a tiny nation of islands in the Caribbean Sea. But there have been only sparse sightings of the humpbacks that migrate south from their northern feeding grounds — and no captures. “I don’t think we’re going to go out today,” says whale hunter Kingsley Stowe, a proud defender of the ancient trade on the verge of disappearing. Whaling was once a big and profitable business in Bequia (pronounced BECK-way), supporting at least a dozen whale boats. But that was before limits on how many whales can be killed and bans on commercial whaling made this the only place in the Americas to still allow harpooning by hand. Now, islanders work under a quota that sets a cap of no more than four whales during the four-month season from February to May. So far this year, the only humpback spotted and harpooned managed to escape. “It’s like carnival when you catch a whale,” says Stowe, standing next to his beached 28-foot whale sailboat Persecution, inspecting the brass tip of a wooden harpoon. “But we don’t kill whales for joke. We kill whales for food.” Even before this season’s so-far failed hunt, there's been resistance to Bequia’s 139-year tradition from fellow islanders, environmentalists and marine mammal scientists. They are pushing for St. Vincent to replace whale hunting with whale watching. “Harpooning whales in St. Vincent and the Grenadines should be a thing of the past. It doesn’t add anything to our economy,” says Gaston Bess, who after more than 30 years of whale hunting called it quits this year. “People should get excited and get their children excited in watching the whales in their natural environment and protecting them.” Bess decided to retire from harpooning during a whale watching expedition in the Dominican Republic last year. “Watching them took my breath away,” says Bess, 50, recalling the joy of seeing a whale for the first time as something other than prey. “Even though I had been around them, struck them and watched them die, now I was watching them ballet, caressing their young.” It's far different when residents spot a whale’s water spout sometimes even from their porches. After jumping in a boat and closing in on the whale, the harpooner readies his position, and the captain adjusts the sails to bring the boat between the whale’s head and tail. Then, the harpooner, standing six to eight feet away, makes his throw. If struck true, the whale would be hauled back to the whaling station on nearby Love Island and butchered. Determined to keep whaling, Stowe purchased his own whale boat and recruited his own crew of young seamen to train this season. “Whaling is a tradition around Bequia,” Stowe says. “We will continue to whale, and we’ll continue the tradition.” Friends who once shared one of the only three whaling boats allowed on the island, Bess and Stowe symbolize the tensions of a whaling industry under worldwide pressure. Earlier this month, the International Court of Justice banned Japan from hunting whales in the icy waters of the Antarctic. Japan claims it is killing the mammals as part of scientific research. Still, some view the decision as a victory for anti-whaling advocates, who for years have argued that there is nothing scientific about Japan’s hunts. They also argue that nothing justifies continued whaling in Bequia. Although locals like the taste of whale meat and use its oil in home remedies, whaling is not native to the area and people don't rely on whale meat or oil to live, said Louise Mitchell. She is chairwoman of the St. Vincent and the Grenadines National Trust, which is against whaling. Today, she says, the few remaining whalers “are holding onto it because it is a tradition. It’s a passion that they have. It’s something they are used to doing and people don’t like change.” Mitchell is the daughter of former Prime Minister James Mitchell, whose government in the 1980s was the first to vote with pro-whaling Japan at the International Whaling Commission. But three decades later — and after going on a whale watching expedition — James Mitchell, too, has had a change of heart. Like ex-whaler Bess, Mitchell thinks it’s time for the island’s 5,000 residents to switch from killing to conservation. “We’re using cellphones to locate where the whales are, and we’re using speedboats to go up to the whale and strike the whale,” he says. “We are no longer involved in the craftsmanship of whale hunting ‘Moby Dick’ style.” Published in 1851 by author Herman Melville, "Moby Dick" is an iconic novel about the pursuit of a great white whale. In her youth, Mitchell says, whaling was part of Bequia’s unique identity. Today, whalers argue fiercely over claims to the kill, and chaos erupts at the whaling station where the meat is sold. “When you go there, all it is is men cutting up this whale, blood everywhere, a lot of arguments, a lot of fighting, a lot of stealing of the whale,” she says. In 2012, the International Whaling Commission renewed Bequia’s whaling quota for six years. This was despite concerns about inhumane killing techniques, use of speedboats, the targeting of baby whales to lure their mothers and the selling of the whale meat. Back at the beach, mammoth whale jawbones serve as stair rails leading to the bay. “There are no whales here to watch,” says Stowe, scanning the rough and empty sea. “You see any whales to watch?” Although for today there are no whales in the choppy waters, he does believe whales will come back. “If we don’t have whaling, what else is there to do?” he says. “As my son said the other day, the only whale I want to watch is the one on my plate.”