Islanders, environmentalists and marine mammal scientists are pushing for the Caribbean island to replace whale hunting with whale watching. BEQUIA, St. Vincent — It’s whale-hunting season in St. Vincent, a small nation of islands in the Caribbean Sea. But there have been few sightings of the humpback whales that migrate from their northern feeding grounds. And as yet, no whales have been captured. “I don’t think we’re going to go out today,” says Kingsley Stowe. He is a whale hunter and a proud defender of the ancient trade, which is on the verge of disappearing. Whaling was once a big and profitable business in Bequia (pronounced BECK-way). There used to be at least a dozen whale boats hunting the huge mammals. But that was before the world limited how many whales could be caught and banned most commercial whaling. So many whales were being killed worldwide, they were in danger of becoming extinct. Now, Bequia is the only place in the Americas that still allows harpooning by hand. Under international law, islanders can kill no more than four whales during the four-month season that lasts from February to May. So far this year, the only humpback spotted and harpooned managed to escape. “It’s like carnival when you catch a whale,” says Stowe, standing next to his whale boat Persecution, inspecting the brass tip of a wooden harpoon. “But we don’t kill whales for joke. We kill whales for food.” Even before this season’s failed hunt, there's been resistance to whaling from fellow islanders, environmentalists and marine mammal scientists. They are pushing for St. Vincent to replace whale hunting with whale watching. “Harpooning whales in St. Vincent and the Grenadines should be a thing of the past. It doesn’t add anything to our economy,” says Gaston Bess. After 20 years of successful whale hunts, Bess called it quits last year. “People should get excited and get their children excited in watching the whales in their natural environment and protecting them.” Bess decided to retire from hunting during a whale watching expedition that let him see whales as something other than prey. “Watching them took my breath away,” says Bess. It's far different when residents spot a whale’s water spout, sometimes even from their porches. After jumping in a boat and closing in on the whale, the captain brings the boat between the whale’s head and tail. Then, the harpooner, standing six to eight feet away, throws his harpoon. If the harpoon lands true, the whale is brought back and butchered. “Whaling is a tradition around Bequia,” which began in 1875, Stowe said. “We will continue to whale, and we’ll continue the tradition.” The entire whaling industry is under worldwide pressure. Earlier this month, the International Court of Justice banned Japan from hunting whales in the Antarctic. Japan claims it is killing the mammals as part of scientific research. Still, some view the decision as a victory for anti-whaling advocates. For years they have argued that there is nothing scientific about Japan’s hunts and that nothing justifies continued whaling in Bequia. Locals in Bequia like the taste of whale meat and use its oil. But whaling is not native to the area and people don't rely on whale meat or oil to live, said Louise Mitchell. She is chairwoman of the St. Vincent and the Grenadines National Trust, which is against whaling. Today, she says, the few remaining whalers “are holding onto it because it is a tradition. It’s a passion that they have. It’s something they are used to doing and people don’t like change.” Mitchell is the daughter of former Prime Minister James Mitchell. His government in the 1980s supported whaling at the International Whaling Commission. But three decades later — and after going on a whale watching expedition — James Mitchell, too, has had a change of heart. Like ex-whaler Bess, Mitchell thinks it’s time for the island’s 5,000 residents to switch from killing to conservation. “We’re using cellphones to locate where the whales are, and we’re using speedboats to go up to the whale and strike the whale,” he says. “We are no longer involved in the craftsmanship of whale hunting ‘Moby Dick’ style.” Published in 1851 by Herman Melville, Moby Dick is a famous novel about the pursuit of a great white whale. When she was younger, Mitchell says, whaling was part of Bequia’s unique identity. Today, whalers often fight over who killed a whale, and chaos erupts at the whaling station where the meat is sold. “When you go there, all it is is men cutting up this whale, blood everywhere," she said. There are a lot of arguments, a lot of fighting, and people steal the whale meat. In 2012, the International Whaling Commission said Bequia could continue hunting whales for six more years. This was despite concerns about inhumane killing methods, using baby whales to lure their mothers and selling whale meat. Back at the beach, mammoth whale jawbones serve as stair rails leading to the bay. “There are no whales here to watch,” says Stowe, scanning the rough and empty sea. “You see any whales to watch?” Although for today there are no whales in the choppy waters, he says the whales will come back. “If we don’t have whaling, what else is there to do?” he says. “As my son said the other day, the only whale I want to watch is the one on my plate.”