St. Vincent is the only place in the Americas that permits hunting whales with harpoons. BEQUIA, St. Vincent — It’s whale-hunting season in St. Vincent, a tiny nation of islands in the Caribbean Sea. But there have been few sightings of the humpback whales that migrate through the waters off the island. As yet, no whales have been captured. “I don’t think we’re going to go out today,” says whale hunter Kingsley Stowe. He is a proud defender of whale hunting, which is close to disappearing. Whaling was once a big and profitable business on the island of Bequia (pronounced BECK-way), a part of St. Vincent. There used to be at least a dozen whale boats there. But that was before the world limited how many whales Bequia's people could catch and banned most for-profit whaling. So many whales were killed worldwide that whales were dying out. Now, Bequia is the only place in the Americas that still allows harpooning by hand. Under international law, islanders can kill no more than four whales during the four-month season. Whale season lasts from February to May. So far this year, the only humpback spotted and harpooned managed to escape. “It’s like carnival when you catch a whale,” says Stowe. He stood next to his whale boat Persecution, inspecting the brass tip of a wooden harpoon. “But we don’t kill whales for joke. We kill whales for food.” Even before this season’s failed hunt, there's been a lot of opposition to whaling. There's a big push for St. Vincent to replace whale hunting with whale watching. “Harpooning whales in St. Vincent and the Grenadines should be a thing of the past,” says Gaston Bess. After 30 years of successful hunting, Bess called it quits last year. “People should get excited and get their children excited in watching the whales in their natural environment and protecting them.” Bess decided to retire from harpooning during a whale watching expedition. He was touched by beauty of the whales and the way the whale mothers cared for their young. “Watching them took my breath away,” says Bess. It's far different when others on Bequia spot a whale’s water spout. After jumping in a boat and closing in on the whale, the captain brings the boat between the whale’s head and tail. When the boat is about seven feet from the whale, the harpooner strikes. “Whaling is a tradition around Bequia,” Stowe said. “We will continue to whale, and we’ll continue the tradition.” It's not just whaling in Bequia that is in trouble. The entire whaling industry is under worldwide pressure. Earlier this month, the International Court of Justice banned Japan from hunting whales in the Antarctic. Japan claims it kills the whales as part of scientific research. Anti-whalers argue that there is nothing scientific about Japan’s hunts. They also say that nothing justifies whaling in Bequia. People in Bequia like the taste of whale meat and use whale oil. But they no longer rely on whale meat or oil to live, said Louise Mitchell. She is in charge of an anti-whaling group. Today, she says, the few remaining whalers “are holding onto it because it is a tradition. It’s a passion that they have. It’s something they are used to doing and people don’t like change.” Mitchell is the daughter of former St. Vincent Prime Minister James Mitchell, who led the government in the 1980s. He then supported whaling. But James Mitchell changed his mind after going on a whale watching expedition. Mitchell thinks it’s time for the island to switch from killing to saving the whales. Whaling there is a lot different today than when it started in 1875. “We’re using cellphones to locate where the whales are. And we’re using speedboats to go up to the whale and strike the whale,” he says. When she was younger, Mitchell says, whaling was part of Bequia’s community. Today, whalers often fight over who killed a whale. People also steal the whale meat. In 2012, the International Whaling Commission said Bequia could continue hunting whales for six more years. Many are concerned that the whales are killed in a cruel way. Also, baby whales are used to lure their mothers.The commission doesn't like that the whale meat is sold. Back at the beach, mammoth whale jawbones serve as stair rails leading to the bay. “There are no whales here to watch,” says Stowe, scanning the rough and empty sea. “You see any whales to watch?” Although for today there were no whales, he says the whales will come back. “If we don’t have whaling, what else is there to do?” he says. “As my son said the other day, the only whale I want to watch is the one on my plate.”