Software can ID individual lemurs The average person would probably have trouble telling the difference between a couple of lemurs. It's hard even for scientists who study them.  Now, computers can tell the difference — and they're pretty good at it. Scientists have created software that remembers lemur faces, and it will be used in the forests of Madagascar to identify and track the whereabouts of endangered lemurs. As the BBC reports, the software, known as LemurFaceID, allows scientists to easily track the primates. When it looks at digital photographs, the software can tell the difference between individual lemurs with greater than 97-percent accuracy. Researchers hope the tool will help with the protection of the species. It could also provide a more humane way to identify individual lemurs without hurting them. The team recently published their work in the journal BioMed Central Zoology. To track lemurs, scientists traditionally trapped and tagged individual animals. They noted their physical characteristics: body size, markings, notable scars or injuries. But tracking these lemurs is difficult over long periods of time, as the primates' appearances change. “[We] weren’t particularly satisfied with the common approaches used in lemur research,” Rachel Jacobs told reporters. She is a biological anthropologist at George Washington University and an author of the study. “[S]o we aimed to do something different with red-bellied lemurs, and we sought the expertise of our computer science collaborators,” she said.  To develop the software, Jacobs got help from Anil Jain. He's a distinguished professor at Michigan State University and an expert in biometrics. Biometrics experts study specific characteristics of an animal's body, looking out for patterns. Jain and his students in the computer science department created a set of data. It included 462 images of 80 red-bellied lemurs taken mostly in Ranomafana National Park in Madagascar. The researchers also gave an additional 190 images of other lemur species to the software to test it and improve its skills. To identify an individual, LemurFaceID first identifies a lemur's eyes. It then analyzes the characteristics of each surrounding pixel, which is a tiny portion of the image. “Like humans, lemurs have unique facial characteristics that can be recognized by this system,” Jain said. The new software will give scientists who study lemurs a new tool for tracking them over time. Scientists want data that has been collected over long periods of time. It gives them a fuller understanding of whether a lemur population has grown or declined. It can also show them the survival rates of infant lemurs. It is illegal to own a pet lemur in Madagascar. Some people still try to capture them from the wild, though. The LemurFaceID software could also aid in the fight against illegal captures of the primates.  If a local or tourist takes a clear digital image of a lemur, they can send it to law enforcement and scientists. The police will quickly be able to say if that lemur has been illegally taken from the wild. The researchers believe LemurFaceID could also be adapted to protect other mammals with changing facial and skin patterns. Jain said that he thinks the software could be used to identify bears, red pandas, raccoons and sloths.