Software can ID individual lemurs Lemurs are a type of primate. Monkeys and apes are primates. So are humans. Lemurs live in the forests of Madagascar. It is an island near the coast of Africa. Lemurs are endangered. There are not many of them left in the wild.  Scientists want to keep track of lemurs. But this is not easy. It is hard to tell them apart. But now, computers can help. Scientists have created a new computer program. It recognizes and remembers lemur faces. This software will be used in the forests of Madagascar. It will help track endangered lemurs there. The new computer program is called LemurFaceID. It looks at different pictures of lemurs. It can tell the difference between them almost perfectly. Scientists hope the tool will help protect lemurs. To track lemurs, scientists used to put special tags on the animals. Then, scientists wrote down their body size, markings or any scars. Tracking lemurs over long periods of time can be quite hard. The lemurs change as they grow up. Rachel Jacobs is a scientist from George Washington University. She studies lemurs.  She asked Anil Jain to help make the software. He is a professor at Michigan State University. Jain teamed up with some of his computer science students. They collected many pictures of lemurs to put into the program. Most of the pictures were taken in Ranomafana National Park in Madagascar. LemurFaceID first looks at the eyes of a lemur. It then looks at tiny sections of the picture around the lemur's eyes. This helps it recognize the lemur. Just like human faces, lemur faces are all different, Jain says. Owning a pet lemur in Madagascar is not allowed. Some people still try to capture them from the wild, though. This program could help solve that problem.  Police could give a picture of a lemur to the software program. The software might help the police know if a lemur has been taken from the wild. LemurFaceID might be able to track other animals, too. Jain says the software could track bears, red pandas, raccoons and sloths.