And so are birds and alligators, a study says. It all has to do with the way they breathe. And maybe dinosaurs too. LOS ANGELES — Humans are just OK at taking the oxygen out of the air when they breathe. Many animals do it better. Birds and alligators are better breathers than humans. So are some lizards, according to a new study. Scientists also think that dinosaurs were better at getting oxygen from the air than us. Humans breathe in, then out. When we breathe in, the air moves into our lungs along small airways. It ends up in little sacs where our blood picks up oxygen. The “old” air then moves out of our lungs along the same path it came in. But birds, alligators and lizards breathe in just one direction. Air moves into their lungs through a long system of tubes. But the air does not come back out the same way. The air moves in a circle. This is much better way to get oxygen from the air than the way humans breathe. Scientists discovered that birds breathed like this in the first half of the 20th century. Coal was burned to power trains. So the air in train stations was very dirty. Researchers looked at pigeons that had been breathing this smoky air. They found that the birds had just one black area in their lungs. If pigeons breathed like humans do, scientists would have expected to find that the whole lung was black. Colleen Farmer is a professor at the University of Utah. She said that because only one part of the lung was dark, it showed the air was moving in just one direction. The black bit of the lung was the first part to receive the dirty air. It cleaned the smoke from the air. Birds could have developed this breathing system for many reasons. Scientists think it might help them to turn food into energy very quickly. It could also help them when they fly at high altitudes. The higher the birds fly, the less oxygen there is in the air. Farmer published a study in 2010. This showed that alligators also breathe in just one direction. Farmer realized that there must be more reasons for this type of breathing. Cold-blooded animals spend most of their lives holding their breath. Alligators are cold blooded. So Farmer worked out that this breathing could be important for mixing gases in the lungs when holding a breath. Farmer published another study on Wednesday. It showed that monitor lizards also breathe like this. The professor thinks that all lizards and snakes do the same. She thinks that this type of breathing is more common and older than people thought. Scientists don't know when it first started. But it is possible that some animals breathed like this for 270 million years. That is 100 million years before the first birds. It is 20 million years earlier than anyone thought before. It is impossible to find a live dinosaur alive to see what they did. But alligators, birds and lizards all breathe in one direction. So Farmer thinks dinosaurs did too. She said her next step is to work out how common this is in today's animals. She will also look at beasts from the past. “We have a lot of work ahead of us,” she said.