Monitor lizards, birds and alligators are all better at breathing than humans, according to a new study. They extract more oxygen from the air. Dinosaurs probably did too. LOS ANGELES — It is a little-known fact that when it comes to extracting oxygen from the air we breathe, we humans are just OK. Birds and alligators are more efficient breathers than we are and so are monitor lizards, according to a new study. Scientists also think that animals that are now extinct, such as dinosaurs, were also better at breathing than people. Humans are described as tidal breathers. When we breathe in, fresh air moves into our lungs along progressively smaller and smaller airways. It eventually ends up in little sacs called alveoli, where our bloodstream picks up oxygen and deposits carbon dioxide before the “old” air moves out of our lungs along exactly the same path it came in. But birds, alligators and monitor lizards are “unidirectional” breathers. After the air moves into their lungs, it begins to follow a system of tubes that are similar to the arteries and veins which carry blood. In this system, the air moves through the tubes in only one direction, and this is much more efficient at extracting oxygen from the air than the human way. Scientists discovered that birds are unidirectional breathers in the first half of the 20th century in Europe. Coal was burnt to power trains, making the air in train stations extremely dirty. When researchers examined the pigeons that had been breathing the sooty air, they found the birds had just one black area on their lungs. If pigeons breathed like humans do, the scientists would have expected the entire lung to be black, not just a part of it. “The fact that only one part of the bird lung was dark suggested the air was flowing in one direction," said Colleen Farmer, an associate professor of biology at the University of Utah. Farmer explained that the black section was the first part of the lung to receive the contaminated air and then filter the dirty particles. It isn’t that surprising that birds have developed a more efficient breathing system. Scientists believe it may have evolved to help their high metabolic rates, or their ability to convert food to energy very quickly. It could also allow them to survive when they fly at high altitudes, where oxygen is scarce. Then Professor Farmer published a study in 2010 showing that alligators are unidirectional breathers as well. “That’s when I realized it had to have a function other than supporting the high metabolic rates associated with birds,” she said. Professor Farmer knew that cold-blooded animals spend about 80 percent of their lives holding their breath. So she worked out that this type of breathing could be important for mixing gases in the lungs during a breath-hold. On Wednesday, Farmer published another study in the journal Nature that shows that monitor lizards are unidirectional breathers as well. She believes that further studies will prove that all lizards and snakes are also unidirectional breathers. “Unidirectional breathing appears to be much more common and ancient than anyone thought,” Farmer said in a statement. The scientists are still not sure exactly when unidirectional breathing first developed. But if it all evolved from one ancestor rather than in many different animals at the same time, it is possible there have been unidirectional breathers walking the planet for 270 million years. This is 100 million years before the first birds and 20 million years earlier than anyone thought. It is impossible to directly study whether extinct animals like dinosaurs were unidirectional breathers. But Farmer said that since alligators, birds and probably most lizards all breathe this way, it is likely the system was inherited from an ancestor the dinosaurs also shared. Professor Farmer said the next step in her research is to determine just how common unidirectional breathing is in today's animals, as well as how many beasts from the past breathed in this way. “We want to look at a bunch of lizards and snakes and turtles and amphibians,” she said. “We have a lot of work ahead of us.”