A study says that the way lizards, birds and alligators breathe is more efficient than the way humans breathe. Dinosaurs were probably better breathers too. LOS ANGELES — When it comes to taking oxygen out of the air, there are animals that do it better than humans. Birds and alligators are better breathers than we are. So are some lizards, according to a new study. Scientists also think that animals like dinosaurs that have now died out were better at getting oxygen from the air than people. Humans are tidal breathers. When we breathe in, the air moves into our lungs along small airways. It ends up in little sacs called alveoli, where our bloodstream picks up oxygen. The blood leaves carbon dioxide behind. The “old” air then moves out of our lungs along the same path it came in. But birds, alligators and monitor lizards breathe in just one direction. After the air moves into their lungs, it follows a long system of tubes. The air moves through the tubes but does not come back out the same way, moving in a circle instead. This is much better for getting oxygen from the air than the human way. Scientists discovered that birds breathed like this in the 20th century. Coal was burned to power trains in those days, so the air in train stations was very dirty. Researchers looked at pigeons that had been breathing this smoky air. They found that the birds had just one black area in their lungs. If pigeons breathed like humans do, the scientists would expect the entire lung to be black. Colleen Farmer is a professor at the University of Utah. She said that because only one part of the lung was dark, it showed that the air was just flowing in one direction. This black bit of the lung was the first part to receive the dirty air. It then cleaned the smoke from the air. Birds could have developed this breathing system for many reasons. Scientists think it might help them to turn food into energy very quickly. It could also help them when they fly at high altitudes. The higher the birds fly, the less oxygen there is in the air. Farmer published a study in 2010 which showed that alligators also breathe in just one direction. Farmer realized that there must be more reasons for this type of breathing. It wasn't just for how the bodies of birds work. Cold-blooded animals, such as alligators, spend most of their lives holding their breath. So Farmer worked out that this breathing could be important for mixing gases in the lungs when the breath was held. On Wednesday, Farmer published another study in the journal Nature. It showed that monitor lizards also breathe like this. The professor believes that all lizards and snakes do the same. She thinks that this type of breathing is "much more common and ancient than anyone thought.” The scientists still don't know when it first started. But it is possible there have been animals that breathe like this on Earth for 270 million years. This is 100 million years before the first birds and 20 million years earlier than anyone thought before. It is impossible to find a dinosaur alive to see if they breathed in this way. But Farmer said that because alligators, birds and lizards all do, it is likely dinosaurs did too. Farmer said her next step is to work out how common one-direction breathing is in today's animals. She will also look at beasts from the past. “We want to look at a bunch of lizards and snakes and turtles and amphibians,” she said. “We have a lot of work ahead of us.”