Humans are tidal breathers. We inhale and exhale along the same path. Birds, alligators and lizards are unidirectional breathers, a more efficient way of extracting oxygen. LOS ANGELES — It is a little-known fact that when it comes to extracting oxygen from the air, we humans are just OK. Birds and alligators are more efficient breathers than we are. So are monitor lizards, according to a new study. Scientists also think that dinosaurs and other animals that have died out were also better at breathing than people. Humans are tidal breathers. When we breathe in, fresh air moves into our lungs along smaller and smaller airways. It eventually ends up in little sacs called alveoli, where our bloodstream picks up oxygen and deposits carbon dioxide. Then the “old” air moves out of our lungs along exactly the same path it came in. But birds, alligators and monitor lizards are “unidirectional” breathers. After the air moves into their lungs, it begins to follow a system of tubes that are similar to the arteries and veins which carry blood. In this system, the air moves through the tubes in only one direction. This is much more efficient at extracting oxygen from the air than the human way. Scientists discovered that birds are unidirectional breathers in the first half of the 20th century. Coal was burned to power trains, making the air in the train stations extremely dirty. When researchers examined pigeons that had been breathing the sooty air, they found the birds had just one black area on their lungs. If pigeons breathed like humans do, the scientists would have found the entire lung to be black. Colleen Farmer is a professor at the University of Utah. “The fact that only one part of the bird lung was dark suggested the air was flowing in one direction," she said. Farmer explained that the black section was the first part of the lung to receive the contaminated air and then filter the dirty particles. It isn’t surprising that birds have developed a more efficient breathing system. Scientists believe it may have evolved to help their high metabolic rates, or their ability to turn food to energy very quickly. It could also allow them to survive when they fly at high altitudes, where oxygen is scarce. Farmer published a study in 2010 showing that alligators are also unidirectional breathers. Farmer then realized that this type of breathing had to have another use than just the high metabolic rates of birds. She knew that cold-blooded animals spend about 80 percent of their lives holding their breath. So she worked out that this breathing could be important for mixing gases in the lungs while the breath is held. On Wednesday, Farmer published another study in the journal Nature. It shows that monitor lizards are unidirectional breathers as well. She believes all lizards and snakes are also unidirectional breathers. “Unidirectional breathing appears to be much more common and ancient than anyone thought,” Farmer said in a statement. The scientists are still not sure when unidirectional breathing first developed. But it is possible there have been unidirectional breathers on the planet for 270 million years. This is 100 million years before the first birds and 20 million years earlier than anyone thought. It is impossible to directly study whether extinct animals like dinosaurs were unidirectional breathers. But Farmer said that as alligators, birds and lizards all breathe this way, it is likely dinosaurs did too. Farmer said her next step is to determine just how common unidirectional breathing is in today's animals, as well as how many beasts from the past breathed this way. “We want to look at a bunch of lizards and snakes and turtles and amphibians,” she said. “We have a lot of work ahead of us.”