When Lonesome George, the 100-year-old giant Galapagos tortoise died quietly in 2012, his subspecies became extinct. He has been carefully preserved in his most striking pose. There is a new animal joining the collection of extinct species at the American Museum of Natural History. The presentation displays animals that are no longer living in the world due to environmental causes or harm caused by humans. On display currently are gigantic sloths and miniature horses that have vanished. Joining them is Lonesome George, the last known giant tortoise from Pinta Island. The 100-year-old reptile was living on the Galápagos Islands where he attracted many visitors interested in protecting animals and the environment. The Galápagos is a group of islands that belong to Ecuador and are famous for their wide variety of animals. George's giant tortoise subspecies was hunted for meat and tortoise oil. As a result, they became nearly extinct in the 1900s and George was his kind's only living giant tortoise. There were several attempts to help George have offspring with other tortoises, but he died without descendants on June 24, 2012. That is how he was given the nickname Lonesome George. What remains of Lonesome George is a lifelike mount at the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) in New York City. The mount was designed by a team of taxidermists. These experts take parts of the animal's body to create a statue that looks like the real animal when it was alive. The process to bring George from Ecuador to New York was a long one. George was discovered dead one morning by his trainer, Fausto Llerena. He was 100 years old. Galápagos tortoises can live up to 150 years, so George’s death was unexpected. That same day, a group of conservationists had just arrived at the Galápagos Island for a citizen science workshop. Conservationists hope to protect animals and the environment. When Llerena informed the Galápagos National Park Service of George’s passing, they shared the sad news with their guests, many of whom began to cry. For Eleanor Sterling, a chief conservation scientist at the AMNH who arrived on the island that day, the next 24 hours were filled with shock. “We just witnessed extinction,” she said. Sterling and the other conservationists began making arrangements for examining George's dead body. They split George’s shell in half with a chainsaw and determined that he had died of natural causes. Next, the group needed to protect George from the hot temperatures that could rot his body. After 36 hours, the tortoise was carefully put in a large freezer and safely wrapped. The conservationists decided the best option was to preserve George in a process known as taxidermy. This method uses parts of the animal's body to create a statue that looks like the real animal. However, the job to restore George's carcass would require a very special taxidermist. The scientists recommended George Dante for the task. Dante had done taxidermy preservation work for Alaskan brown bears and other creatures for the museum’s North American Mammal Hall in 2012. Preserving George would be his biggest challenge since that project. It took months to obtain special permits and make the travel arrangements. When George finally arrived at Dante's office in New Jersey, he defrosted the corpse. After George’s body thawed, every centimeter of the tortoise was measured before creating a mold that looked exactly like George's body. He filled the mold with foam, which would eventually become the base on which he would add a water-based clay to create George’s features. On top of that clay he would stretch out George’s skin. His biggest challenge was working on a species that had never been mounted before. “The beauty is that there’s no handbook on how to do it,” he said. Special glass eyes were created for George that had never been done before. Dante was well aware he was working on what he had called “the world’s pet.” As such, he knew there was no room for error. Every centimeter had to be scientifically accurate, from his shell to the missing toenail on his left front foot. He checked hundreds of pictures to create every wrinkle in George’s skin. He drew green stains around George’s mouth and neck to make it appear as if the tortoise had just finished grazing. When it came time for a pose, Dante asked for an opinion from Fausto Llerena who was George's trainer. Llerena advised Dante to show George striking a familiar pose. The result was George's neck stretched out in a dominant pose and his tailed tucked in submissively. On Sept. 18, 2014, after 500 hours of labor conducted over more than a year, Dante was finally ready to present George to the museum and the people who helped bring him there. Among the audience at George’s exhibition were several people who were also present for his death, including Sterling. They were all pleasantly surprised with Dante’s work. “You could see the look in his eye, and you could see the pose,” Sterling says. “He brought Lonesome George back to life.” Surrounded by other extinct species, George looked a little less lonesome. But there was a difference between him and the other animals. They died due to the changing climate and weather patterns. George and his relatives disappeared because humans hunted them. _Editor's Note: Lonesome George is on temporary display at the museum until Jan. 4, 2015, after which he will be shipped and put on display in Quito, Ecuador._