A 100-year-old giant turtle, Lonesome George, was the last in his family to survive so long. After he died, scientists wanted people to see and learn from him. He has a new home in a museum. The American Museum of Natural History will have a new animal guest. The museum in New York teaches visitors about animals that have died off, or become extinct. Some of the animals died because of environmental causes. Others died because of harm from people. The museum has some big sloths and small horses. Now, joining them is a giant tortoise nicknamed Lonesome George. The 100-year-old tortoise is from the Galápagos Islands. The Galápagos is a group of islands that belong to the South American country of Ecuador. The islands are famous for having many different types of animals and plants. For a long time, George's family of giant Galápagos tortoises had been hunted for meat and oil. Almost all of the tortoises died. George was the only one of his kind left. Scientists tried to help George have children with other types of giant tortoises. But George would not mate. That is how he got the nickname Lonesome George. He died without family on June 24, 2012. George will become a statue at the museum. The lifelike statue was designed by experts. They used a process known as taxidermy. Parts of George's body were combined with other materials to make a statue that looks very real. It was a long and difficult process to bring George to the New York City museum. It began when one morning, George's trainer found him dead. George was only 100 years old. Giant tortoises can live up to 150 years. On the day George died, a group of scientists had come to visit. The scientists were sad when they found out that George died. Many of them cried. The scientists wanted to remember George. They thought the best way to preserve him was with a process called taxidermy. They believed that a man named George Dante in New Jersey would be best for the job. To make sure George stayed as lifelike as possible, the scientists carefully froze his body. Dante allowed the ice to melt off. Then the taxidermist measured the whole body. He molded a shape that looked exactly like George. Then he filled the mold with foam. On top of the foam, Dante added clay to shape George’s body. Then he stretched out George’s skin over the clay. Dante was very careful with his work. Dante looked at many pictures of George. He made sure every wrinkle on the tortoise's body was in the right spot. There were special glass eyes made in just the right colors. He drew green marks around George’s mouth. This would make make it look like the tortoise had just finished eating grass. Dante worked for 500 hours on the statue. After more than a year, Dante finished remaking George. On Sept. 18, 2014, Dante gave George to the museum. Scientists who were with George when he died came to see the statue. They were all happy with Dante’s work. One scientist said the statue looked very real and brought Lonesome George back to life. At the museum, George is surrounded by other extinct animals. He looks a little less lonely. Still, there is a difference between George and the other animals. They died because their environment changed. George and his family are gone forever because humans hunted them to extinction. _Editor's Note: Lonesome George is on display at the museum until Jan. 4, 2015. Then he will be shipped and put on display in Quito, Ecuador._