Fossil could be 13,000 years old Scientists have dug up the skull of a mammoth that they think may have walked the planet 13,000 years ago. Mammoths are the ancient relatives of elephants. The last mammoths died off thousands of years ago.  The mammoth skull was found on Santa Rosa Island. This island is part of Channel Islands National Park off the coast of California. The skull, which was buried along a stream on Santa Rosa, is in great shape and still has its tusks. Today's elephants and walruses also have these long, pointed teeth. Justin Wilkins was one of the scientists who dug up the skull. He works at the Mammoth Site in South Dakota. The fossils of 61 mammoths have been found there. Still, Wilkins says the skull on Santa Rosa is one of the best-preserved mammoth skulls he's ever seen. The skull is an important find for another reason. Scientists think it may prove that humans and mammoths lived on Santa Rosa around the same time.  Wilkins worked with two other scientists to dig up the skull from the ground. They had to work very slowly to remove the layers of dirt around it. They didn't want to damage the skull. Scientists took samples of charcoal that were near the fossil. The samples turned out to be 13,000 years old. The scientists think the skull might be the same age. That is about the age of the oldest human skeleton found in North America, too. This skeleton was found on Santa Rosa Island in 1959.  The mammoth skull was first discovered in September 2014 by a scientist named Peter Larramendy. He was looking around Santa Rosa because he thought he might study the streams there. That's when he spotted a large ivory tooth. It was sticking out from a rock wall. Scientists are confused by the size of the skull. It could have belonged to a small, fully grown mammoth, but it’s possible that it was from a young Columbian mammoth. When fully grown, Columbian mammoths were very large. Even more confusing is the size of the mammoth's tusks. The right one is more than four-and-a-half feet long and turns up at the end, which is like the tusk of an older mammoth. But the left tusk is shorter and sloped, like the tusk of a younger animal. Now, scientists are working to measure the spacing, surface thickness and number of teeth in the skull. This information will show them when the mammoth died and what type of mammoth it was. The scientists will then transport the skull to the mainland using both a helicopter and a boat. The skull will be taken to the Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History, where it can be carefully cleaned, preserved and studied. It will be displayed there in the future.