A curator of Seattle's Burke Museum, in charge of the dig, estimates the tusk will weigh 500 pounds when covered in plaster. It was found at a construction site where, luckily, there's a big crane. SEATTLE — Digging out a mammoth’s tusk is a pretty straightforward, though tough, task. The guy in charge might have an impressive science degree, as does Christian Sidor of the Burke Museum. Still, Thursday afternoon he and three other museum staff members were in the ground 30 feet below street level. Each was using a shovel, a spade and sometimes just their hands to move dirt. When they're finished digging it out, the tusk will head to the museum. The tusk was found Tuesday at a construction site for a block of apartment buildings. About 7 feet of it had been uncovered so far. Sidor thinks that the whole tusk might be 3 or 4 feet longer. Sidor, who is a curator for the museum, was pretty excited. He said he planned to work through the night, if necessary. The Burke has bone remains of 25 mammoths found in the Seattle area, but most are in pieces. "There is nothing as complete as this,” he said. Once it is dug up, the tusk will be encased in plaster to protect it. Sidor figured it would then weigh about 500 pounds. He happily noted the construction site had a 137-foot crane to hoist it up. Eventually, people will be able to view the tusk at the museum. It will help them learn about life in the Puget Sound region back when it resembled an Arctic plain. Actually, Puget Sound didn’t even exist then. In between ice ages, there were just flatlands, until water filled them in. Right now, Sidor said he could only make a guess as to how old the tusk is. He figured the tusk is probably 22,000 years old — but it could be as much as 60,000 years old. Scientists will do a test called carbon dating to figure out how old it is. Carbon is found in most living things. By measuring how much is left in objects, like bones or tusks, scientists can figure out the age of ancient things. The mammoths around here, called Columbian mammoths, were big guys. They were the size of modern-day African elephants, with an adult male weighing 15,000 to 20,000 pounds. The mammoths were vegetarians, and gobbled up 300 to 600 pounds of green eats a day, said museum staffer Bax Barton, who was also at the dig. The region most likely had three or four herds of the mammoths, with each herd consisting of 30 to 40 animals. As the climate changed and became warmer, said Barton, forests formed and that left less food. The property where the apartments are being constructed is owned by AMLI Residential. Scott Koppelman, an executive with the company, admitted that AMLI at first got "a little nervous” when told about the discovery of the tusk. But then the company “realized the benefits far outweighed the cost.” Even if it means some construction delay. There are no laws that would have prevented AMLI from going ahead with construction and destroying the tusk. But, Koppelman said, “community involvement is very important” to the company. Sidor said he didn’t expect that more mammoth remains would be found. He said animals would have eaten most of the mammoth, but not the tusk because it had no nutritional value as food. But if more of the mammoth was found, said Sidor, “Of course, we’d love to have it.” Koppelman said, “We’ll deal with that when we cross it.” On the east side of the construction site is a building housing the Bright Horizons Child Care. The kids and staffers there certainly hoped more of the mammoth would be found. They talked eagerly about how neat that would be. The staffers made plans to make sure to watch at 4 p.m. Friday, when the tusk is expected to be lifted up. And as for the kids, they chanted, “Dig it! Dig it up!”