Four staffers of the Burke Museum dug out a mammoth's tusk which was uncovered at a construction site. SEATTLE — A mammoth's tusk — that long tooth from an ancestor of the elephant — may be huge. But digging it up is still a pretty straightforward task. The guy in charge of the dig might have a fancy degree. Christian Sidor of the Burke Museum does. But it really just comes down to getting into the dirt and digging away. Thursday afternoon Burke and three others from the museum were in the ground 30 feet below street level. Each was using a shovel, a spade and sometimes just their hands to move dirt. When they're done uncovering it, the tusk will head to the museum. The tusk was found Tuesday at a construction site for apartment buildings. About 7 feet of it had so far been uncovered. Sidor thinks the whole tusk might be 3 or 4 feet longer. Sidor is a curator for the museum. He was pretty excited by the find. He said he planned to work through the night, if necessary. The Burke museum already has remains of 25 mammoths found nearby, but most are in pieces. "There is nothing as complete as this,” he said. Once it's dug up, the tusk will be covered in plaster to protect it. Sidor figured it would then weigh about 500 pounds. He happily pointed out that the construction site had a 137-foot crane to lift it up. Eventually, people will be able to view the tusk at the museum. It will help them learn about life in the Puget Sound region back when it was like an Arctic plain. It was just a chilly grassland then. Actually, Puget Sound wasn't even around back then. In between ice ages, there were just flatlands. Water filled them in later. Right now, Sidor said, he could only make a guess as to how old the tusk is. He figured the tusk is probably 22,000 years old. But it could be as much as 60,000 years old. A test of the carbon in the tusk will be done to figure out how old it is. The mammoths around here were called Columbian mammoths. They were the size of elephants you would find today in Africa. Full-grown males weighed between 15,000 and 20,000 pounds. The mammoths were vegetarians, said museum worker Bax Barton, who was also at the dig. They gobbled up 300 to 600 pounds of greens a day. The region most likely had three or four mammoth herds, each made up of 30 to 40 animals. Forests sprung up as the climate became warmer, said Barton. That left less food for the mammoths. The property where the apartment buildings are being constructed is owned by AMLI Residential. Company boss Scott Koppelman admitted that AMLI got "a little nervous” when told about the discovery of the tusk. But then the company “realized the benefits far outweighed the cost,” even if it means some construction delay. There are no laws that would have prevented AMLI from going ahead with construction and destroying the tusk. But, Koppelman said, “community involvement is very important” to the company. Sidor said he didn’t expect that more mammoth remains would be found. He said animals would have eaten most of the mammoth. The tusk was left untouched because it didn't make for good food. But if more of the mammoth was found, said Sidor, “Of course, we’d love to have it.” Koppelman said, “We’ll deal with that when we cross it.” On the east side of the construction site is a building housing the Bright Horizons Child Care. The kids and workers there certainly hoped more of the mammoth would be found. They talked eagerly about how neat that would be. The child care workers made plans to watch at 4 p.m. Friday, when the tusk is expected to be lifted up. And as for the kids, they chanted, “Dig it! Dig it up!”