A mammoth's tusk was found 30 feet below street level at a construction site in Seattle. Four people from the Burke Museum dug it out with shovels and sometimes their hands. SEATTLE — A mammoth's tusk may be huge. But digging up this long tooth from an ancestor of the elephant isn't complicated. The guy in charge might have a fancy degree. Christian Sidor of the Burke Museum does. But it really just comes down to getting into the dirt and digging away. Thursday afternoon Burke and three others from the museum were in the ground 30 feet below street level. They were using a shovel, a spade and sometimes just their hands. Once it's dug up, the tusk will head to the museum. The tusk was found Tuesday at a construction site. About 7 feet of it had so far been uncovered. The whole tusk may be 3 or 4 feet longer. Sidor is a curator for the museum. He was pretty excited by the find. He planned to dig through the night, if necessary. The Burke has remains from 25 mammoths found nearby, but most are in pieces. "There is nothing as complete as this,” he said. Once it's dug up, the tusk will be covered in plaster to protect it from damage. Sidor figured it would then weigh about 500 pounds. He happily noted one piece of good luck: The construction site has a 137-foot crane to lift it up. Eventually, people will be able to view the tusk at the museum. It will help them learn about life in the Puget Sound region many thousands of years ago. Back then it was like an Arctic plain. It was really just a chilly grassland. Actually, Puget Sound wasn't even around then. In between ice ages, there were just flatlands. Water filled it in over the years. Sidor said he could only guess how old the tusk is. He figured the tusk is probably 22,000 years old. But it could be as much as 60,000 years old. Tests need to be done on the tusk to figure out how old it is. The mammoths that once lived around here are called Columbian mammoths. They were the size of elephants you would see today in Africa. Full-grown males weighed between 15,000 and 20,000 pounds. The mammoths may have looked scary, but they were vegetarians. They gobbled up 300 to 600 pounds of greens a day. The region most likely had three or four mammoth herds. Each was made up of 30 to 40 animals. As the climate became warmer, forests formed. That left less food for the mammoths. AMLI Residential owns the property where the tusk was found. Company boss Scott Koppelman admitted they weren't too happy at first. AMLI got "a little nervous” when told about the discovery. After all, it meant they might have to stop work on apartments the company is building there. But then the company “realized the benefits far outweighed the cost.” Even if it means some construction delay. AMLI could have just gone ahead with construction and destroyed the tusk. There are no laws to stop it. But, Koppelman said, “community involvement is very important” to the company. Sidor said he didn’t expect that more mammoth remains would be found. He said animals would have eaten most of the mammoth. The tusk wasn't eaten. It isn't good for food. But what if more of the mammoth is found? “Of course, we’d love to have it,” said Sidor. Koppelman said, “We’ll deal with that when we cross it.” Bright Horizons Child Care is right next to the construction site. The kids and workers there certainly hoped more of the mammoth would be found. They talked eagerly about how neat that would be. The child care workers plan to watch at 4 p.m. Friday, when the tusk is expected to be lifted up. And as for the kids, they chanted, “Dig it! Dig it up!”