The tropical regions around the equator give birth to more species, and more quickly, than other regions. Species die out a lot more slowly too. Scientists have come up with some reasons why. The Earth’s warm, sweaty midsection is host to more types of living things. A new study reports that the tropical regions of the Earth near the equator produce new species faster. Species in the tropics also go extinct more slowly. The tropical regions of the Earth make up an area that lies between lines of latitude called the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn. Lines of latitude are imaginary lines on a map that run parallel to the equator. The area called the tropics does not have seasons like fall and spring. That's because of year-round direct sunlight. The study's findings were published in the journal PLOS Biology. They show that the tropics have been a source of different types of creatures in the cooler regions of the planet with little climate change. Scientists have long noticed that tropical ecosystems are full of different kinds of animal species. Ecosystem means all living and non-living things existing together in a certain area of the Earth. Tropical ecosystems have many different kinds of animals. That makes them diverse. Ecosystems in colder areas of the world are not as diverse since they have fewer types of species. But scientists haven’t agreed on why this is. They have come up with a few different theories. One is the "cradle" theory. It supposes that species are cradled by the warm, wet weather near the equator. Or, it could be that the region is a "museum" of different species. The museum theory supposes that species are less likely to go extinct or disappear from the Earth if they live in tropical regions. What scientists can agree on is that the tropical regions send a range of species to other parts of the planet. That means that animals tend to develop in the tropics and then move to cooler areas of the world. But not all researchers agree on the reason why this is. Researchers say there are more than a hundred different theories. Those theories attempt to explain creature movement from tropical areas of the Earth toward colder regions. So the researchers from around the world decided to compare different types of mammals. Researchers compared eight different mammalian orders. The eight orders chosen for the study make up 92 percent of all mammals living on Earth. They then looked at how fast or slow new species form. They also researched the speed at which extinction happens. In addition, researchers looked at how likely it was for each mammal to leave the tropics and move to what scientists call the temperate zone. The temperate zone is the area of Earth both north and south of the equator. The climate in this zone is mild. It is not as warm as the tropics. The researchers found that in the tropics, both the “cradle” and “museum” explanations were true. In the tropics a large amount of new species are formed. And a low number of species are going extinct and disappearing from the Earth. These forces combine, making a wider variety in the types of species. There was only one mammal order of the eight that did not thrive in the tropics. That order is called Lagomorpha. It includes hares, rabbits and pikas. This may be because these adorable-eared animals first appeared in temperate regions. Lagomorphas are also better suited for grasslands. The study authors concluded that the results suggest that the tropics is a good place to preserve a range of species for the planet. They also said it is the main place where a range of different species get their start. It’s not clear exactly why that’s the case. It could be for a few reasons. The regularly warm climate is one reason. Another reason could have to do with all the natural energy created by year-round sunlight. Any of these of such explanations could be true. Scientists need to do more research.