Since dinosaurs aren't around, humans rule the daytime. Mammals were mainly active at night until the dinosaurs were killed off, a new study finds.  The findings are described in the journal Nature Ecology & Evolution. They show a pivotal transition in the history of Earth's living things. The dinosaurs met their end some 66 million years ago when an asteroid hit Earth.  Scientists have long wondered whether ancient mammals may have been mainly nocturnal, or active at night. They wondered because dinosaurs ruled daytime activities, possibly prompting mammals to be less visible during the day for survival. The idea is known as the "nocturnal bottleneck hypothesis."  Living mammal species today carry signs of a dark past. For example, most mammals, except humans and many other primates, don't have a fovea. It's an area of the eye that allows for the clearest vision. The shape of many mammals' eyes also favors low-light sensitivity to help them see in the dark. The eye shape is not as suited to seeing sharply. Additionally, other senses might have developed in many mammals to make up for not seeing well in the dark, the study authors noted. A sharper sense of smell and broader ability to hear might have come about to help. Sophisticated whiskers might have developed for the same reason. Why were mammals such night owls? They may have had to avoid being around dinosaurs, which typically operated in daylight. This flipped schedule may have been a lifesaver. It could be what kept mammals from becoming furry afternoon snacks. However, the evidence for this idea is mostly indirect, the scientists said. Trying to determine whether some long-dead mammal was nocturnal is tricky. They decide based on its preserved bone structure. Plenty of daytime mammals today have skull and eye shapes that look like those of a nocturnal animal.  An international team of researchers worked to further explore this mystery. They compared the activity patterns for 2,415 different mammal species. The team collected records from databases, research articles, field guides and encyclopedias about the behavior of these species.  The researchers used the information to determine whether their behavior fit into one of five patterns. These included nocturnal behaviors, or activity at night, and diurnal behaviors, activity in the day. Others were cathemeral behaviors, or activity during both day and night, and crepuscular behaviors, activity only around sunrise and sunset. The final pattern, ultradian behavior, is activity in cycles of a few hours at a time. Researchers focused on species in the first three categories, nocturnal, diurnal and cathemeral. They analyzed the mammalian family tree. The team found that the ancestors of today's mammals were probably nocturnal. The animals probably stayed nocturnal until around the time that the dinosaurs died off, they found. "Our evidence suggests that mammals remained nocturnal throughout the Mesozoic," the authors wrote. They were referring to the Mesozoic Era. It went from about 252 million to 66 million years ago. The time is known informally as the Age of Reptiles. Their study showed that the shift among some mammal species to diurnal activity happened after the extinction event. The earliest mammals that were strictly diurnal included simian primates, which are apes or monkeys. That was around 52 million to 33 million years ago. Though scientists can't say that one caused the other, the study provides new indirect evidence. However, it also appears that cathemeral activity, which is during both day and night, may have emerged much earlier. It is estimated to have happened roughly 9 million years before the dinosaurs disappeared. If dinosaurs still ruled the daytime, why would some mammals start to shift into that space? There are a few possible explanations. Perhaps cathemeral mammals were trying to reduce the chances of being eaten by other mammals at night. Maybe the spread of flowering plants, and the insects that evolved with them, provided new opportunities for mammals to thrive. However, there's also growing evidence that dinosaurs were in decline long before the asteroid wiped them out. This may have opened opportunities for mammals to start inching into the daylight. Eventually, they could seize the day.