Using a shovel, a spade and sometimes their bare hands, four staffers of the Burke Museum dug up a mammoth's tusk that was found at a construction site. SEATTLE — When you get right down to it, digging out a mammoth’s tusk is a pretty basic task. The guy in charge might have a doctorate degree in biology, as does Christian Sidor of the Burke Museum. Nonetheless, Thursday afternoon he and three other museum staff members were in the ground 30 feet below street level using a shovel, a spade and sometimes just their hands to move dirt. When they're finished digging it out, the tusk will head to the museum. They had so far uncovered about 7 feet of it at the South Lake Union apartment complex construction site where it was found Tuesday. Speculations were that the tusk might be 3 or 4 feet longer. Sidor, who is a curator for the museum, was pretty excited, and said he planned to work through the night, if necessary. “The Burke has 25 mammoth fossils from King County, but most are very fragmented. There is nothing as complete as this,” he said. Sidor figured that by the time it was pulled up, after being encased in plaster to protect it, the tusk would weigh about 500 pounds. He happily noted the construction site had a 137-foot crane to hoist it up. Eventually, people will be able to view the tusk at the museum, where it will help them learn about life in the Puget Sound region when it resembled an Arctic plain. Actually, Puget Sound didn’t even exist back then — there were just flatlands there in between ice ages. Right now, Sidor said, he figured the tusk was probably 22,000 years old — or maybe even 60,000 years old. A carbon dating test will look at how much carbon-14 — something found in all living things — is left in the tusk. By determining how much has decayed, they can figure out how old it actually is. The mammoths around here, called Columbian mammoths, were big guys. They were the size of modern-day African elephants, with an adult male weighing 15,000 to 20,000 pounds. The mammoths were vegetarians, gobbling up 300 to 600 pounds of green eats a day, said Bax Barton, another of the Burke Museum staffers at the dig. The region most likely had three or four herds of the mammoths, with each herd consisting of 30 to 40 animals. As the climate changed and became warmer, said Barton, forests formed and that left less food. The property where the apartment complex is being constructed is owned by AMLI Residential. Scott Koppelman, an executive with the company, admitted that AMLI at first got "a little nervous” when told about the discovery of the tusk. But then the company “realized the benefits far outweighed the cost,” even if it meant some construction delay. There are no state or federal laws that would have prevented AMLI from going ahead with construction and destroying the tusk. But, Koppelman said, “community involvement is very important” to the company. Sidor said he didn’t expect that more mammoth remains would be found. He said animals would have eaten most of the mammoth, but not the tusk because it had no nutritional value. But if more of the mammoth was found, said Sidor, “Of course, we’d love to have it.” Koppelman said, “We’ll deal with that when we cross it.” On the east side of the construction site is the backside of a building housing the Bright Horizons Child Care. The kids and staffers there certainly hoped more of the mammoth would be found, and talked about how neat that would be. The staffers made plans to make sure to watch at 4 p.m. Friday, when the tusk is expected to be lifted up. And as for the kids, they chanted, “Dig it! Dig it up!”