Since dinosaurs aren't around, humans rule the daytime. Long ago, mammals mostly lived their lives at night, a new study says. The extinction of all the dinosaurs appears to have changed things for mammals. Humans, dogs and horses are all mammals. They all have hair or fur, a backbone and breathe air. Unlike humans, the dinosaurs were not mammals. They were reptiles. Many were also the distant ancestors of modern-day birds. The dinosaurs met their end some 66 million years ago when an asteroid from outer space hit Earth.  The study's findings are described in the science journal Nature Ecology & Evolution. The findings show a key change in the history of Earth's living things. Scientists have wondered for a long time whether ancient mammals may have been mainly nocturnal, or active at night. Dinosaurs ruled the daytime. The fear of dinosaurs might have caused mammals to be less visible during the day for survival. The idea is known as the "nocturnal bottleneck hypothesis."  Living mammal types today carry signs of being nocturnal. For example, most mammals, except humans and many other primates, don't have a fovea. It's an area of the eye that allows for the clearest vision. The shape of many mammals' eyes favors low-light sensitivity to help them see in the dark. The eye shape is not as suited to seeing sharply. Other senses might have developed in many mammals to make up for not seeing well in the dark, the study's writers said. A sharper sense of smell and broader hearing might have come about to help. Advanced whiskers might have developed in the same way. Why were mammals such night owls? They may have had to avoid being around dinosaurs, which usually operated in daylight. This flipped schedule may have been a lifesaver. It could be what kept mammals from becoming furry snacks. However, the proof for this idea is mostly indirect, the scientists said. Trying to determine whether some long-dead mammal was nocturnal is tricky. They decide based on old bone findings. Plenty of daytime mammals today have skull and eye shapes that look like those of a nocturnal animal. Some mammals are still nocturnal.   A worldwide team of scientists worked to explore further. They compared the behavior of 2,415 mammal types. The team collected records from articles, encyclopedias and more about the behavior of these mammals.  The scientists then determined whether mammals' actions fit into one of five patterns. Those included nocturnal or diurnal, meaning activity in the nighttime or daytime. Others were cathemeral, or activity during both day and night, and crepuscular, which is activity only around sunrise and sunset. The final pattern is ultradian. Such animals are active in cycles of a few hours at a time. The team focused on the first three categories, nocturnal, diurnal and cathemeral. They studied the mammal family tree. The team found that the distant parents of today's mammals were probably nocturnal. The animals probably stayed nocturnal until the dinosaurs died off, they found. The study's writers said that their evidence suggests that mammals remained nocturnal through the Mesozoic Era. It went from about 252 million to 66 million years ago. The time is also called the Age of Reptiles. The study showed that some mammal types shifted to daytime after the dinosaurs died. Scientists can't say that one caused the other. However, the study provides new indirect evidence. The earliest mammals that were active only during day included simian primates. Those are apes or monkeys. It was around 52 million to 33 million years ago.  However, it also appears that cathemeral behavior may have started much earlier. Some mammals were active during both day and night before the dinosaurs disappeared. It is estimated to have happened roughly 9 million years before the dinosaurs died. If dinosaurs still ruled the daytime, why would some mammals move into that space? There are a few possibilities. Perhaps cathemeral mammals were trying to reduce the chances of being eaten by other mammals at night. Maybe the spread of flowering plants, and the insects with them, gave new opportunities for mammals to thrive. However, there are signs that dinosaurs were fading long before the asteroid hit. This may have given mammals a chance to start inching into the daylight.