Fossil could be 13,000 years old The skull of a mammoth that may have roamed the planet 13,000 years ago has been unearthed on Santa Rosa Island. Santa Rosa is one of five islands that make up Channel Islands National Park off the coast of Southern California. Burrowed in the banks of an eroding stream, the “exceptionally well-preserved fossil” with tusks is a rare find. It is especially significant because it suggests that the mammoth walked the islands at nearly the same time as humans. “I have seen a lot of mammoth skulls and this is one of the best preserved I have ever seen,” said paleontologist Justin Wilkins. Wilkins works at the South Dakota-based Mammoth Site, an active dig site where the fossils of 61 mammoths have been discovered. He said the discovery on Santa Rosa Island is “of high scientific importance.” Wilkins worked with retired National Park Service archaeologist Don Morris and Monica Bugbee, a preparator (someone who prepares scientific samples to be studied), to excavate the skull. Digging up the fossil from layers of dirt was slow, painstaking work. Charcoal samples near the complete skull were found to be 13,000 years old. This overlaps with the age of the oldest human skeletal remains in North America. A set of human remains was found on the Santa Rosa Island in 1959, indicating that people lived there some 13,000 years ago. The fossil was named Arlington Springs Man after the site where the remains were found. Scientists analyzed bone protein and radiocarbon dating to determine the age of the fossil. Radiocarbon dating is a method that looks for levels of a type of carbon, known as carbon-14, in a material. Carbon-14 is radioactive and is found everywhere. Over time, the radiation in carbon-14 decays. When the radiation leaves a substance, its chemical makeup changes, which allows scientists to determine how old it is. The mammoth fossil was first discovered in September 2014\. National Park Service biologist Peter Larramendy was surveying the area for a stream study when he spotted an ivory tusk bulging from the gravel wall of the canyon. Scientists named the fossil Larry after both Larramendy and one of world’s leading paleontologists, Larry Agenbroad, who died in 2014. The size of the find has left the scientists puzzled. They can’t determine if the skull belonged to a Columbian mammoth, one of the largest species of mammoth, or a pygmy mammoth, a smaller species. It’s possible the fossil could be a medium-sized or young Columbian mammoth. Columbian mammoths appeared in North America a million years after the first mammoths appeared on the continent. Sea levels were low when the Columbian mammoths moved to the Channel Islands in the last two ice ages. The land was also closer to the coast of the mainland. Known as Mammuthus exilis, their offspring was much shorter than the mammoths who had come before, downsizing from 14 feet to 6 feet. Even more confusing to scientists is the size of the fossil’s tusks. At 1.4 meters, the right tusk turns up, like the tusk of an older mammoth. But the left tusk is shorter and sloped, like that of a juvenile mammal. Scientists are working to measure the spacing, surface thickness and number of teeth in the fossil. This information could reveal when the mammoth died and what type of mammoth it was. Meanwhile, the team will cover the specimen with burlap and plaster to protect it. The scientists will then transport the fossil by helicopter and boat to the mainland. The mammoth will be taken to the Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History, so it can be carefully cleaned, preserved and studied. The fossil will be added to the museum's collection and displayed in the future.