Why is there so much biological diversity in the Earth's warm, wet regions? Scientists come up with some theories, and maybe some answers. If you’re looking for hot spots of diversity, look to the Earth’s warm, sweaty midsection. A new study analyzed the evolution and extinction rates of nearly all mammal species on Earth. It found the tropical regions near the equator both produce new species faster and lose them more slowly. The findings were published in the journal PLOS Biology. They show that the tropics have been a major source of biodiversity for the cooler, more moderate regions of the planet. Biodiversity, short for biological diversity, describes the variety of living things like plants, animals and organisms that inhabit a particular area or region of the Earth. Scientists have long noticed that tropical ecosystems are rich with different kinds of animal species whereas ecosystems in colder regions have far less diversity. Nevertheless, they've been unable to agree why it is so. Is it because species develop faster when they live in the warm, wet regions near the equator, making it a “cradle” of biodiversity? Or is it simply because they’re less likely to go extinct there — making it a “museum” of biodiversity? Either way, many scientists suspect that the tropics are acting as a source of biodiversity for other parts of the planet. In other words, many species develop in the tropics and then spread outward from the equator to higher, cooler latitudes. But not all researchers agree on why this is. The authors of the study published in PLOS Biology say there are many different theories. "Over 100 hypotheses" have been proposed to explain species movement from tropical areas of the Earth toward polar regions. So the researchers from the Ecole Polytechnique and the National Museum of Natural History in France decided to compare different types of mammals. There are more than 4,000 different species of mammals. Because of this, scientists have classified mammals into 19 different orders with certain characteristics that define each order or group of mammals. Researchers compared eight, species-rich mammalian orders. Those eight orders or groups of different mammals with certain characteristics make up 92 percent of all mammals living on Earth. The researchers then analyzed speciation rates to see how often new species come into being. They also analyzed their extinction rates. In addition, researchers looked at how likely it was for each mammal to spread outside of the tropics toward the temperate zones. The researchers found that in the tropics, both the “cradle” and “museum” explanations were true. In the tropics, rates of new species forming were higher while rates of extinction were lower, leading to higher rates of diversity. For almost all of the eight species-rich mammalian orders, the diversity in the tropics was higher than in the temperate regions. One exception was the order Lagomorpha, which includes hares, rabbits and pikas. This may be because these adorable-eared animals actually emerged in the temperate regions and are better suited for grassland dwellings. “These results suggest that tropical regions are not only a reservoir of biodiversity, but also the main place where biodiversity is generated,” the study authors wrote. It’s not clear exactly why that’s the case. It could be, to name a few ideas, because the climate in the tropics is more stable, because there are more ecological niches available to newly emerging species, or because of all that energy in the form of year-round direct sunlight. Any combination of such explanations could be true, and will require further research. “Mammals are one of the most charismatic and well-documented groups of living organisms,” the study authors wrote. They went on to explain that their vision of mammalian evolution on a large scale “continues to change drastically as new data are compiled and new methods are developed.”