Fossil could be 13,000 years old Scientists have dug up the skull of a mammoth. They think the mammoth may have walked on Earth 13,000 years ago. Mammoths are the early relatives of elephants. They no longer live on Earth. The last mammoths died off thousands of years ago.  The mammoth skull was found on Santa Rosa Island. This island is part of the Channel Islands National Park. It's located off the coast of California.  Justin Wilkins is one of the scientists who dug up the skull. He said the skull is in the best shape of any he's ever seen. It even has its tusks, two long, pointed teeth that stick out from its mouth. Today's elephants also have tusks. Wilkins worked with two other scientists to dig up the skull. They had to work very slowly and carefully. It took a long time to remove all of the dirt. Scientists studied the ground near the skull to find out how old the mammoth is. They think the skull is about 13,000 years old. That is also the age of the oldest human skeleton ever found in North America. These human remains were also found on Santa Rosa.  That is what makes the skull such an important find. It could show that mammoths and people lived on Santa Rosa around the same time. The mammoth was discovered on Santa Rosa in 2014\. A scientist was looking around Santa Rosa. He thought he might do a study of the stream there. That's when he spotted a huge tooth. It was sticking out of a rock wall. Scientists are confused about the size of the skull. The mammoth might be a small, fully grown animal. Or, it could be a younger mammoth that would have grown much larger. The mammoth's tusks are even more curious. The right one is over four feet long. It curls up at the end. This is like the tusk of an older mammoth. The left tusk is sloped and much shorter, though. That is like the tusk of a younger animal. Scientists want to learn more about the mammoth. They are studying teeth in its skull. This may give them clues about how the mammoth died. It could also tell them what kind of mammoth it was. The scientists will then bring the remains to the mainland. There, the skull can be carefully cleaned and studied by scientists. It will be put on display for people to look at.