Fossil could be 13,000 years old Scientists have dug up the skull of a mammoth that may have walked the planet 13,000 years ago. The skull was found burrowed alongside a stream on Santa Rosa Island. Santa Rosa is part of Channel Islands National Park off the coast of Southern California. The surprisingly well-preserved skull specimen, complete with tusks, is a rare find for scientists. It is especially important because it suggests that the mammoth roamed the islands at nearly the same time as humans. Justin Wilkins is a paleontologist, a scientist who studies fossils. He was one of the scientists who dug up the skull. “I have seen a lot of mammoth skulls and this is one of the best preserved I have ever seen,” he said. Wilkins works at the Mammoth Site in South Dakota, where more than 61 mammoths have been discovered. He said the new skull discovery is incredibly important to science. He worked with two other scientists to remove the skull from layers and layers of dirt. It was slow work, because they had to be very careful not to damage the fossil.  Charcoal samples found near the skull are 13,000 years old. That is about the same age as the oldest human skeleton ever found in North America. In 1959, a set of human remains was found on Santa Rosa Island. Scientists analyzed the skeleton to determine its age. Their findings showed that people probably lived on Santa Rosa about 13,000 years ago. The mammoth skull was first discovered in September 2014 by a scientist named Peter Larramendy. He was considering doing a study of streams on Santa Rosa and was looking around the area. That's when he spotted an ivory tusk sticking out from the gravel wall of a canyon. Scientists named the fossil Larry after Larramendy. The name also honors one of world’s leading paleontologists, Larry Agenbroad, who died in 2014. The size of the skull has left the scientists puzzled. They are not sure whether it belonged to a fully grown small mammoth, or a younger member of a much larger species. It’s possible the specimen could be a medium-sized or young Columbian mammoth. These mammoths were very large. Columbian mammoths appeared in North America a million years after the first mammoths appeared on the continent. Sea levels were low when the Columbian mammoths moved to the Channel Islands in the last two ice ages. Back then, the land was also closer to the coast of the mainland. Even more confusing to scientists is the size of the mammoth's tusks. The right tusk is long, measuring 1.4 meters, and it turns up at the end. This is like the tusk of an older mammoth. The left tusk, however, is shorter and sloped, like that of a younger animal. Scientists are now working to measure the spacing, surface thickness and number of teeth in the skull. This information could show when the mammoth died and what type of mammoth it was. The scientists will then transport the specimen by helicopter and boat to the mainland. The mammoth will be taken to the Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History, so it can be carefully cleaned, preserved and studied. It will be displayed there in the future.