Since dinosaurs aren't around, humans rule the daytime. The dinosaurs died a long time ago. It happened when an asteroid, or a large rock from outer space, hit the Earth many years ago.  After dinosaurs disappeared, many things changed. Now scientists are saying that mammals changed, too. Mammals have fur or hair. They have a backbone and breathe air. Humans, dogs and horses are all examples of mammals. A new study says that mammals used to be mostly night animals. They would do things like search for food instead of sleeping. They might sleep during the day.  It might have been because they were afraid. If they had gone out during the day, the dinosaurs might have eaten them. The study shows a big change in the history of living things.   Scientists have wondered if mammals were nocturnal years ago. Being nocturnal means you are most active at night. Dinosaurs ruled the daytime. They slept at night. Other animals might have stayed in during the day because they were afraid.  Today's mammals have signs of being nocturnal. For example, the shape of their eyes might help them see in the dark.  At night, animals still might have had trouble seeing. So they might have gotten better with other senses like hearing, the study said. They might also smell better. Even whiskers could help them find their way. Some mammals are still nocturnal. Some also go out at different times of night and day. Dinosaurs were usually out during the day. Being out at night might have saved the mammals. It could have kept them from becoming snacks. The evidence for this idea is not clear, the scientists said. Trying to see if a dead animal was nocturnal is hard.  A worldwide team of scientists worked to learn more. They looked at many kinds of mammals. The team read articles, books and more about the animals.  They studied the animals' family histories. The team found that the long-ago ancestors of today's mammals were probably nocturnal. The animals probably stayed nocturnal until the dinosaurs died, they said. The study showed that some mammals moved to daytime after the dinosaurs died. Scientists can't say why for sure. Still, the study gives new information.  Some mammals were out in both day and night. It is thought to have happened long before the dinosaurs died. If dinosaurs ruled the daytime, why would animals go out? There are a few ideas.   The asteroid might have killed the dinosaurs. Still, it seems there were not as many even before the asteroid hit the planet. This may have given mammals a chance to go into the daylight.