More species are born in the tropics than anywhere else. And species die out more slowly there. Scientists are trying to figure out why this is so. The Earth’s warm, sweaty midsection is a great place to find many different types of living things. A new study reports that warm parts of the Earth near the equator are rich in different types of animals and plants. This part of the world is known as the tropics. New species come into being more often the tropics. Species in the tropics also die off, or go extinct, more slowly. The tropics do not have seasons like fall and spring. Year-round direct sunlight keeps the climate steadily warm. The study shows that the tropics have helped other parts of the world get a wider range of living creatures. An ecosystem includes all living and non-living things existing together in a certain place. For example, a desert is an ecosystem. Both the sand and the snakes are part of the desert ecosystem. Tropical ecosystems have many different kinds of animals. That makes them diverse. Ecosystems in colder areas of the world are not as diverse since they have fewer types of species. But scientists haven’t agreed on why this is. The tropics are warm and wet. That might help new types of animals and plants form faster. Warm temperatures might also make it harder for animals and plants to go extinct or disappear from the Earth. Either way, the tropics have brought animal diversity to other parts of the planet. The species first form in the tropics and then move to cooler areas of the world. But no one knows why. So researchers from around the world decided to study different mammals. There are more than 4,000 different kinds of mammals. Because of this, scientists have classified mammals into 19 different orders. Each group has something in common. Researchers compared eight different mammalian orders. Researchers then looked at how fast or slow each creates new species. They also researched the speed at which extinction happens. The researchers also looked at how likely it was for each mammal to leave the tropics and move to the temperate zone. The temperate zone is a part of the Earth both north and south of the equator. The climate in this zone is mild. It is not as warm as the tropics. The researchers found that in the tropics large numbers of new species were forming. And a low number of species were going extinct. This leads to a wide range of species. There was only one mammal order of the eight that did not thrive in the tropics. That order is called Lagomorpha. It includes hares, rabbits and pikas. This may be because these animals actually developed in the temperate regions. Lagomorphas are also better suited for grasslands. Scientists said that the study points to the tropics as a place where the Earth's range of animals is well preserved. They also said it is the place where much of the Earth's animal diversity comes from. It’s not clear exactly why that’s the case. It could be for a few reasons. The regularly warm temperature is one reason. Another reason could have to do with all the natural energy created by year-round sunlight. Scientists need to study the question further.