Scientists are trying to determine why the tropical regions both produce new mammal species faster and lose them more slowly than other regions, like the temperate zone. The Earth’s warm, sweaty midsection is a hotbed for animal diversity. A new study analyzed the evolution and extinction rates of nearly all mammal species on Earth. It reports that the tropical regions of the earth near the equator both produce new species faster and lose them more slowly. The findings were published in the journal PLOS Biology. They show that the tropics have been a major source of biodiversity for the cooler regions of the planet with little weather change. Biodiversity is short for biological diversity. It means the variety of plants, animals and other living things that inhabit a particular area or region of the earth. Scientists have long noticed that tropical ecosystems are rich with different kinds of animal species. Ecosystems in colder regions have far less diversity than ecosystems in tropical regions. But scientists haven’t agreed on why this is. Is it because the warm, wet region near the equator is a "cradle" of biodiversity where species develop faster? Or is the region a "museum" of biodiversity where species are less likely to go extinct? Either way, many scientists suspect that the tropics are acting as a source of biodiversity for other parts of the planet. In other words, many species develop in the tropics and then spread outward from the equator to higher, cooler latitudes. But not all researchers agree on the reason why this is. The authors of the study published in PLOS Biology say there are more than a hundred different theories. The theories attempt to explain species movement from tropical areas of the Earth toward polar regions. So researchers from around the world decided to compare different types of mammals. Researchers compared eight species-rich mammalian orders. Orders are groups. The groups consist of different mammals with certain characteristics. The eight orders chosen for the study make up 92 percent of all mammals living on Earth. The researchers then analyzed how fast different species form. They also analyzed their extinction rates. In addition, researchers looked at how likely it was for each mammal to spread outside of the tropics toward the temperate zones. The temperate zone is the Earth's surface between the Arctic Circle and the Tropic of Cancer or between the Antarctic Circle and the Tropic of Capricorn. The researchers found that in the tropics, both the “cradle” and “museum” explanations were true. High rates of new species formation and low rates of extinction in the tropics lead to higher rates of diversity. For almost all of the eight species-rich mammalian orders, the diversity in the tropics was higher than in the temperate regions. The order Lagomorpha, which includes hares, rabbits and pikas, did not thrive in the tropics. This may be because these adorable-eared animals actually first developed in the temperate regions. Lagomorphas are also better suited for grassland environments. The study authors concluded that the results suggest that the tropical region is a reservoir for biodiversity. They also said it is the main reason why biodiversity exists. It’s not clear exactly why that’s the case. It could be for a few reasons: One being that the climate in the tropics is more stable. Another reason could be because the tropical region is an environment that can host newly emerging species. Yet another reason for the tropics being a prime place for animals, plants and other living things to thrive is because of all that energy coming from year-round direct sunlight. Any combination of such explanations could be true, and will require further research. The researchers explain that their vision of mammalian evolution on a large scale “continues to change drastically as new data is compiled and new methods are developed.”