The surge in Florida's manatee count shows that conservation works. But this trend may hurt, not help, the animals. Boaters want to end the manatee's endangered species status. MIAMI — Two years ago, Florida counted 828 manatee deaths, the most ever recorded. This year, things appear to be getting better for the marine mammal. Florida biologists announced Monday that they have counted a record number of manatees, also called "sea cows." A yearly statewide survey, conducted over several days in February, counted 6,063 manatees in Florida's waters. This was about 1,000 more than the previous record, set in 2010. “Counting this many manatees is wonderful news,” said Richard Corbett, who is chairman of the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission. “The high count this year shows that our long-term conservation efforts are working.” But some conservationists, who are people who work to protect animals, plants and natural resources, say not so fast. Biologists suspect that warm temperatures helped the state get the high tally by bringing the slow-moving and portly mammals to the surface where they could soak up the sun, making it possible for them to be seen by counters. Even though the new survey results seem positive, some conservationists are concerned. Patrick Rose is the executive director of the Save the Manatee Club, an organization started in the 1980s by musician Jimmy Buffett, who is famous for the "Cheeseburger in Paradise" song, and former Florida Governor Bob Graham. He said that numbers alone do not mean a healthy future is guaranteed for the manatee. “I want to finish the job before people misunderstand what a count like this means,” he explained. He worries that the survey results will persuade the U.S. government to decide that manatees do not need to continue to be protected. “It’s good news, but it doesn't mean we’re done.” Some disagree and think that the rules protecting manatees should become less strict. Last spring, a group of boaters in Crystal River joined forces with the Pacific Legal Foundation to appeal to federal wildlife managers to consider taking manatees off the federal government's list of endangered species and putting them on the list of threatened animals. This may seem like a small change, but it would alter the rules protecting manatees. The groups in favor of making this change point out that a 2007 review found manatees were rebounding. It is up to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) to decide whether manatees are "endangered" or "threatened." Spokesman Chuck Underwood said the USFWS expects to make a decision later this year. Along with the manatee population, the agency will consider the survival rates of adults, the areas where manatees can live, and the availability of warm water. Manatees have been a protected species for more than a century. Florida first began protecting manatees in 1893. In 1967, the federal government included the Florida manatee among 78 original species listed under the Endangered Species Act. Florida started annual statewide surveys of the manatee population in 1991, using airplanes to count manatees from overhead. It is not an easy task. Weather prevented counts during the last two years, said Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission spokesman Brandon Basino. Biologists try to cover much of the state in just a few days in an attempt to ensure that they count each manatee only once. This year, a team of 20 counted 3,333 manatees on Florida’s East Coast and 2,730 on Florida's West Coast, Basino said. Keeping track of the manatee population is important because people have put the animal in jeopardy. Since 1974, about 41 percent of manatee deaths have been linked to human activity. More than a third of the deaths were tied directly to boat collisions. In recent years, deaths have been increasingly caused by pollution. Rose said the rise in the number of manatees has come despite continuing threats from boat traffic and loss of their natural habitat, or environment. These are issues that state lawmakers have done little to control, according to Rose. Boats are still a serious threat. Some areas where manatees used to live have become inhospitable. In 2014, a total of 276 manatees died after a toxic red tide spread across the Gulf of Mexico. Another 100 manatees died on the East Coast after algae infested lagoons. “The process is getting harder and harder,” Rose said. “The votes that have been taken over the years have been more lip service than really securing the future.”