Manatees in Belize face increasing threats from development. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) made headlines around the world earlier this month. It said that the Florida manatee and the Antillean manatee are not “endangered.” Instead, the FWS said, these sea cows were only “threatened.” The FWS thinks they are no longer in danger of extinction. That may be true in Florida, but not in other places. Some conservationists fear that the Antillean manatee are not safe. They live in the Caribbean and South America. “The FWS is painting it as if things are good,” says Jamal Galvez. He is a biologist with the Sea to Shore Alliance. For 15 years, he has been trying to save the manatee near his country, Belize.  Belize is south of Mexico. He says the FWS is wrong. In Belize the manatee find their home waters shrinking. Tourism is changing the land on the coast. Galvez says seagrass beds have been dug out and mangrove forests torn down for cruise ship ports. The manatees move away. More tourism means more speed boats. At least 40 manatees, the highest number ever, were killed in 2015\. Some were killed by boats and others in fishing nets. Three have already been killed this year, Galvez reports.  Belize has one of the largest populations of Antillean manatees. The country has almost 1,000 living along its coast. Galvez says it is the most important country for saving manatees outside of the U.S. Sadly, the recent FWS news has made many people in Belize think the job is done. “People are calling me and saying ‘Jamal, you did it, you did it," he says.   Galvez worries this thinking will undo all that has been done over the past 10 years. He adds that thinking they are not endangered could lead to extinction. Manatees are protected in Belize. But the country’s 1981 Wildlife Protection Act is an old law. Belize needs to change the law to do more for manatees, Galvez says. The U.S. Endangered Species Act has helped. It is a law that shows his country better laws can be passed. “Being on the Endangered Species Act was what really got people concerned about the manatee here in Belize,” he says. The next few years could be important for Belize’s manatees. Galvez says that they are not sure enough baby manatees are being born. At the same time, new ports are being built. Galvez says more has to be done.