Manatees in Belize face increasing threats from development. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) made headlines around the world earlier this month. The FWS suggested that the Florida manatee and the Antillean manatee will no longer be listed as “endangered.” Instead, the agency said, the famed sea cows should be labeled “threatened.” The FWS believes they’re no longer in danger of extinction. That may be true in Florida, but manatees face much greater threats elsewhere. In fact, some conservationists fear that this change could be the thing that pushes some groups of Antillean manatees into extinction. The Antillean subspecies live in the Caribbean and South America.  “The FWS is painting it as if things are good,” says Jamal Galvez, a biologist with the Sea to Shore Alliance. He has been working on manatee conservation in his native Belize for more than 15 years. “Their assessment doesn’t take into account what is happening down here in Belize.” What’s happening there isn’t very good. Just like in Florida, the manatees in Belize find their home waters shrinking. The coasts are being developed to increase tourism. Galvez says developers have dug out seagrass beds, torn out mangrove forests and built cruise ship ports in the places where manatees live. More tourism also means more high-speed boats, and that means more injured and killed manatees. At least 40 manatees, the highest number ever, were killed in 2015 by boats or other dangers such as fishing nets. Three have already been killed this year, Galvez reports. “The pressures that have been brought on this population have only been increasing through the years,” says Galvez. He says they haven't been able to stop the things that are killing the manatees. Belize has one of the largest populations of Antillean manatees. The country has almost 1,000 living along its very small coastline. Galvez says it is the most important country for manatee conservation outside of the U.S. Sadly, the recent FWS news has made many people in Belize believe that manatee conservation is now a job well done. They think the animals are no longer at risk. “People are calling me and saying ‘Jamal, you did it, you did it,’ and I’m not accepting that. I know that the population is not in a good place,” he says. Galvez worries this thinking will slow — or even reverse — the progress that he and other conservationists have had over the past 10 years. “We’ve worked so hard to get people to see that they are at risk and trying to convince people why they should change their behavior,” he says. All of that, he fears, is now up in the air. He adds that thinking they are not endangered could lead to extinction. Manatees are protected in Belize, but the country’s Wildlife Protection Act hasn’t been updated since 1981 and only goes so far. “It doesn’t do much to protect manatees by itself,” Galvez says. What has apparently worked, however, is the U.S. Endangered Species Act. That law may not have had any direct influence in Belize, but Galvez says it does help small or developing nations like Belize to set the standards for both conservation and conversation. “Being on the Endangered Species Act was what really got people concerned about the manatee here in Belize.” The next few years could be important for Belize’s manatees. Galvez says that they are not sure the population is staying the same. “We don’t have information that they’re reproducing at the rates that we need,” Galvez says. Meanwhile, new ports continue to be built and the threats to manatees continue to grow. Other dangers, such as global warming are yet to come. That’s why Galvez says tackling problems such as manatees being pushed away from their home waters, boat injuries, fishing nets and pollution is so important in Belize today. “We need to control the issues that we can control.”