If there's strength in numbers, Florida's manatees have it made. But their fans fear that a record manatee count could make it easier for their foes to end their endangered species status. MIAMI — According to a new Florida survey, it is a good time to be a manatee. Manatees are large sea creatures, sometimes known as sea cows. Because there are not many manatees left, they are on the list of endangered species. As a result, there are rules that protect manatees from possible harm. Scientists pay close attention to whether the manatee population is growing or shrinking. Two years ago, Florida counted 828 manatee deaths. It was the most ever recorded. This year, things appear to be getting better. Florida biologists announced Monday that they have counted a record number of the manatees. An annual statewide survey, conducted over several days in February, counted 6,063 manatees in Florida waters. This was more than the previous record, set in 2010, by about 1,000. Florida started yearly statewide surveys of the manatee population in 1991, using airplanes to count manatees from overhead. It is not an easy task. Weather prevented counts during the last two years, said Brandon Basino. He works at the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, a group that tries to protect animals from dying off. To count all of the manatees in Florida waters, scientists try to cover much of the state in just a few days. If they took more time, manatees might move and accidentally get counted more than once. This year, a team of 20 counted 3,333 manatees on Florida’s East Coast and 2,730 on Florida's West Coast, Basino said. “Counting this many manatees is wonderful news,” said Richard Corbett. He is also part of the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission. “The high count this year shows that our long-term conservation efforts are working.” Even though the new survey results seem positive, some conservationists, people who are trying to protect the environment, are concerned. Patrick Rose is part of the Save the Manatee Club, which was started in the 1980s by musician Jimmy Buffett and former Governor Bob Graham. Rose said the survey results do not necessarily mean that the manatee is safe. He said that people might interpret the survey results incorrectly. He worries that people will think that manatees do not have to be protected anymore because many of them were counted this year. He thinks that there is more work to be done to keep manatees safe. “It’s good news, but it doesn't mean we’re done,” he said. Other people think that the rules protecting manatees should become less strict, however. Last spring, two groups asked the government to consider taking manatees off the list of endangered species and putting them on the list of threatened species instead. This may seem like a small change, but it would make a big difference. The rules protecting threatened species are different than the rules for endangered species. Are manatees endangered or threatened? It is up to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). Chuck Underwood works for the USFWS. He said the group expects to decide later this year whether manatees are still endangered. Manatees have been a protected species for more than a century. Florida first began protecting manatees in 1893. In 1967, the government made the manatee one of 78 original species listed under the Endangered Species Act . Much of the danger to manatees has come from humans. Since 1974, about 41 percent of manatee deaths have been linked to human activity. More than a third died because they were hit by boats. In recent years, manatees have also been dying as a result of pollution. Rose said that there are still a lot of threats to manatees. Some areas where manatees used to live have become unlivable, and boat traffic is still dangerous. State lawmakers have done little to address these issues. “The process is getting harder and harder,” Rose said. He wishes lawmakers worked harder to keep manatees safe.