Tortoise relocation put on hold TWENTYNINE PALMS, Calif. - "Do not harm the desert tortoises" is a firm rule at the Marine base in Twentynine Palms, California. Troops there are also warned not to drop any food crumbs that might attract ravens, the main predator of the tortoises.  Desert tortoises have high-domed, greenish-tan to dark brown colored shells. Their front legs have sharp, clawlike scales and are flattened for digging, and their back legs are long and skinny. An adult can reach six inches in height, weigh up to 15 pounds, and live as long as 100 years. They are found in the states of California, Nevada, Utah and Arizona. Tortoises share the Mojave desert around Twentynine Palms with the Marine Air Ground Task Force Training Command. The huge base is nearly as big as the state of Rhode Island. Most Marines go there for training before deploying to Iraq or Afghanistan. The Marines say they take good care of the tortoises near the base. Certain areas are off-limits, and soldiers and scientists even help run a hatchery, where young tortoises are hatched and cared for. Still, a battle is brewing between the Marines and environmentalists. The problem is a military live-fire exercise planned for August. The event was supposed to include new land that is home to many desert tortoises. The Marines were planning to airlift more than 1,100 of the tortoises out to protect them from bombs, artillery and military vehicles. Just before the relocation was to begin, a Tucson-based environmental group protested. The group says the relocation would kill many of the tortoises. They also say that it would disobey the Endangered Species Act, a United States environmental law that protects endangered and threatened species from extinction. The tortoises are listed as a threatened species, a step below endangered.  Ileene Anderson is a scientist with the group. She says, "This proposed translocation is a disaster for the already at-risk desert tortoises in the west Mojave Desert." The group warned that it would go to court to stop the relocation. As a result, the airlift is on hold, the training exercise has been downsized and federal officials are reviewing the plan. The Defenders of Wildlife is another advocacy group. It says that the western Mojave tortoise population has dropped by 90 percent since the early 1980s. The group blames drought, respiratory disease and an increase in the number of ravens for the decline. In addition, the group says suburban development and more recreational vehicles in the desert have also contributed. In response to environmentalists' concerns, the Marines say they are monitoring the health of the tortoises. Scientists have placed small transmitters on the reptiles' shells. The Corps is also planning to spend $50 million on the operation through the year 2045. "We're not just going to throw them over a fence," says Walter Christensen, who manages the natural and cultural resources at the base. He says that the places the turtles will be moved to are near the base. They also have enough water and food and are still far enough away that the tortoises will not try to walk back. The Marines have also moved the planned training away from areas where there are many tortoises, and will use fewer tanks and armored vehicles. In addition, no live-firing will be done in Johnson Valley, the area of the base that is central to the dispute. The August exercise was to be the first time that the Marines used the land. They hoped to find out whether the valley would be good for large-scale exercises in the coming years. The military has engaged in this argument before. In 2013, Congress passed a law that allows 107,000 acres to be used exclusively by the Marine Corps, and 50,000 to be shared between the Marines and others. The exercise in August will use sections of the shared land and the land from the Marines. Environmentalists' concern is based on another tortoise relocation done in 2008 at the Army's Fort Irwin, east of Twentynine Palms. The program was suspended after one year when about 30 percent of the tortoises died. The Marines say that the Fort Irwin comparison is misleading. Brian Henen is an ecologist at the Twentynine Palms base. He says the mortality rate of the tortoises that were moved was the same as that of tortoises that were not moved. Henen says that the main cause was really a drought, and federal officials came to the same conclusion when they investigated. The United States Fish and Wildlife Service says it is reviewing its approval of the relocation plan. Approval is needed for the move since the desert tortoise is listed as threatened. Brian Croft is a wildlife biologist with the service. He has sympathy for both sides and says his agency has dealt with numerous problems related to moving the tortoises before. Croft said of the relocation that "...as long as it's planned properly, it can be done without increasing the mortality rate of the animals." Federal officials expect to decide in September whether the Marines can go ahead with the airlift.