Oyster farming had taken over the waters of Drakes Estero for years. Now the oyster company is gone and the parks service is cleaning it up. The bay will be a marine wilderness once again. POINT REYES NATIONAL SEASHORE, Calif. — The oyster farm at the end of the dirt road looked as if it had suddenly been abandoned. Doors and windows were wide open. Buildings were stripped of everything that was valuable. Inside, the mud-covered floors were cluttered with what was left from the oyster farm: a shopping cart, fishing poles, plastic gloves, office chairs. Farmers had groomed crops of oysters in the clear waters of Drakes Estero for years. Now, bits of yellowed plastic foam that had broken off a floating barge bobbed in the water. This was what remained after a court battle between the oyster farmer and the National Park Service. The National Park Service fought to take back the Estero. It won after several years and spending millions of dollars in lawsuits. Now, the park is undertaking an uncommon mission. It is returning the area to its original state of wilderness. It is expensive work and it must be completed before the marine wilderness can be opened to the public. “Nature will take over, but we have to do some restoration to help it get there,” Point Reyes National Seashore superintendent Cicely Muldoon said. “We have to give natural processes a fighting chance.” “When we are finished, visitors will have a phenomenal experience,” she added. The waters of the Estero, or estuary, will become only the second marine wilderness in the national park system, joining Alaska’s Glacier Bay. Farmers have been cultivating oysters from the Estero since the 1960s. The Lunny family operated the oyster farm here under a permit from 2004 until last December. The oyster farm’s permit required the operators, the Lunny family, to remove farming equipment from the Estero. However, the family argued that they did not have enough money to do so. The park wanted a speedy resolution to the court fight and agreed to a deal. The deal allowed the Lunnys to walk away from the buildings onshore, but required the family to remove all oysters in the water. Someday visitors may be kayaking and snorkeling in Drakes Estero. But first, the cleanup. A crew spent a week scraping off buildings, docks and rusty equipment. This was where the farmers used to harvest oysters and serve snacks to tourists. So far, crews have removed about 40 truckloads of building materials and asphalt. The expense of restoring the Estero waters will also be significant. Officials expect it will take up to a year and cost more than twice the amount of the work done on land. Yet before removing the 5 miles of oyster racks, government agencies will have to come up with a plan that does not harm plants or animals. Much of that planning will fall to Ben Becker, Point Reyes’ lead marine scientist. He recently launched a small boat into the windy bay. Becker was trailing an underwater camera. The camera will help him and the other scientists figure out how to remove a large network of oyster racks. The racks are held up by about 4,700 wooden posts sunk into the Estero’s sandy bottom. The weight of the water-logged wood is estimated at 375 tons. Lifting it out it will probably require a powerful hoist. Already, a crew on the water was removing the remains of the oyster and clam equipment. In one week, workers hauled away 15 tons of oysters, shells, tubes, strings and bags. “I didn’t think there would be as much material left out here as we’ve found,” Becker said, watching the crew haul out hundreds of oyster bags. The bags hit the deck of a floating barge, each one releasing wriggling eels and tiny crabs. The Estero’s 2,500 acres are a natural refuge for seals. But they are believed to have moved to other areas to avoid the oyster farm’s motorboat traffic. Once the area is restored, scientists think seals might come back to the Estero.