The National Park Service has embarked on a huge project: reclaiming the waters of Drakes Estero. With an oyster farm out of the way, scientists are excited for the future marine wilderness. POINT REYES NATIONAL SEASHORE, Calif. — The once-bustling oyster farm at the end of the dirt road looked as if it had suddenly been abandoned. Doors and windows gaped open. Wind-chapped buildings were stripped of everything that was valuable or could be resold to other oyster operators. Inside, the remains of the former oyster business cluttered mud-caked floors: a shopping cart, fishing poles, plastic gloves and office chairs. Farmers had groomed crops of oysters in the clear waters of Drakes Estero, or estuary, for decades. Now, bits of yellowed plastic foam that had broken off of a timeworn floating barge bobbed in the water. It is what remains after a yearslong legal battle between the oyster farmer and the National Park Service, which fought to take back and restore the bay. The park service won after spending millions of dollars in lawsuits that ended at the U.S. Supreme Court. The park is now undertaking an uncommon mission. It is returning a landscape to its original state of nature. It is expensive work that must be completed before the West Coast’s first marine wilderness can be unveiled to the public. “Nature will take over, but we have to do some restoration to help it get there,” Point Reyes National Seashore superintendent Cicely Muldoon said. “We have to give natural processes a fighting chance.” She added, “When we are finished, visitors will have a phenomenal experience.” The waters of the Estero will become only the second marine wilderness in the national park system, joining Alaska’s Glacier Bay. Commercial farmers have been cultivating oysters from the Estero in earnest since the 1960s. The Lunny family operated the oyster farm here under a permit from 2004 until last December. The oyster farm’s permit required the Lunny family to remove all commercial equipment from the Estero. However, the family argued that doing so would bankrupt them. The park wanted a speedy resolution to the legal wranglings and agreed to a deal. The deal allowed the Lunnys to walk away from the facilities onshore but required the family to remove all oysters in the water. The settlement also allowed the dozen or so former employees who live on the site to stay for at least three months while the government attempts to find housing for them, and they will receive up to 42 months of help with their rents. As crews carefully remove remnants of the farm, Point Reyes' Muldoon gushes about kayaking and snorkeling in Drakes Estero. Explorer Sir Francis Drake is believed to have made landfall in this tidal area 430 years ago. But first, the cleanup. The crew spent a week scraping off buildings, docks and rusty equipment where the farmers used to harvest oysters and serve snacks to tourists. The onshore cleanup has, so far, cost $214,000, and more work remains. Crews removed 660 yards of building material and some 6,250 square feet of asphalt, amounting to about 40 truckloads of rubble. The expense of restoring the Estero itself will also be significant. Officials expect it will take up to a year and cost more than twice the amount of the work done on land. Before removing the 5 miles of oyster racks, a group representing federal, state and local agencies will have to agree on a plan that ensures no harm to plants or animals. Much of that planning will fall to Ben Becker, Point Reyes’ lead marine scientist. He recently launched a small boat into the wind-chopped bay and slowly motored away from the fog-shrouded rolling hills of the seashore. Becker was trailing an underwater camera that will help him and the other scientists figure out how to wrench out an extensive network of oyster racks held up by some 4,700 wooden posts sunk into the Estero’s sandy bottom. The weight of the water-logged wood is estimated at 375 tons, and lifting it out will likely require a powerful hoist. Already a crew on the water was removing the remains of the oyster and clam operation. In one week, workers hauled away 15 tons of oysters, shells, tubes, strings and bags. “I didn’t think there would be as much material left out here as we’ve found,” Becker said, watching the crew haul out hundreds of oyster bags. The bags hit the deck of a floating barge, each one releasing a wriggling tangle of eels, followed by a platoon of tiny marching crabs. The Estero’s 2,500 acres are a natural refuge for seals, which are believed to have moved to other areas to avoid the oyster farm’s regular motorboat traffic. Wildlife biologist David Press said that he does not expect the seal population to increase immediately, but they might eventually come back to the Estero. The National Park Service sees this recovery as a case study for future marine wilderness areas, said Erin Drake, who works for the park service’s National Wilderness Stewardship Program. “We will be learning on the fly and looking at what others do,” she said.