Tortoise relocation put on hold TWENTYNINE PALMS, Calif. - There is a unique rule at the Marine base in Twentynine Palms, California. Troops sent to the Marine Air Ground Task Force Training Command in the Mojave Desert are warned not to harm the resident desert tortoises, or drop any food crumbs likely to attract ravens, the arch-predator of the tortoises.  Desert tortoises are found in the Mojave and Sonoran deserts of California, Nevada, Utah and Arizona. An adult tortoise can reach six inches in height, weigh up to 15 pounds, and live as long as 100 years. The tortoises share the Mojave desert around Twentynine Palms with the Marine base, which is nearly the size of Rhode Island. Most Marines go there for training before deploying to Iraq or Afghanistan.  Certain areas of base are off-limits, and the Marines even run a hatchery with the University of California, Los Angeles. Still, a battle is brewing between the Marines and advocates for the reptiles. The problem is a military live-fire exercise set for August. The Marines have conducted similar exercises in the past, but this year's event was supposed to include new land that is home to many desert tortoises. The Marines were planning to airlift more than 1,100 of the tortoises out to protect them from getting hurt by bombs, artillery and Humvees. However, just weeks before the relocation was to begin, the Center for Biological Diversity in Tucson protested. Scientists there say the relocation would mean certain death for large numbers of the tortoises. They also say that it would violate the Endangered Species Act, a United States environmental law designed to protect endangered and threatened species from extinction.  Ileene Anderson is a scientist with the diversity center. She says, "This proposed translocation is a disaster for the already at-risk desert tortoises in the west Mojave Desert." With a possible court case brewing to stop the relocation, the airlift is on hold, the training exercise has been downsized and federal officials are reviewing the plan. The advocacy group Defenders of Wildlife says that the western Mojave tortoise population has dropped by 90 percent since the early 1980s. The group blames drought, respiratory disease and an increase in the number of ravens for the decline. In addition, the group says suburban development and more recreational vehicles in the desert have also contributed. In response to environmentalists' concerns, the Marines say they are monitoring the health of the tortoises with small transmitters on the animals' backs. The Corps is planning to spend $50 million on the operation through the year 2045. "We're not just going to throw them over a fence," says Walter Christensen, Natural and Cultural Resources Branch Manager at the base. He says that six spots adjacent to the base have been assigned for the relocation, have sufficient water and food and are far enough away that the tortoises will not try to walk back. Faced with the possible lawsuit, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service says it is reviewing its approval of the relocation plan. Approval is needed for the move since the desert tortoise is listed as a threatened species, a notch below endangered.  The Marines have moved the planned training away from tortoise-heavy areas, and will use fewer tanks and armored vehicles. In addition, no live-firing will be done in Johnson Valley, the area of the base that is central to the dispute. Training is an everyday event at the base, but the August exercise was to be the first time that the Marines used Johnson Valley. They hoped to find out whether the valley would be good for large-scale exercises. The Marines previously fought environmental groups and local landowners over use of Johnson Valley, which was controlled by the federal Bureau of Land Management. In 2013, Congress passed a law that allows 107,000 acres to be used exclusively by the Marine Corps, and 50,000 to be shared between the Marines and civilians. The August exercise is to include sections of both areas, as well as other parts of the base. The Marines say that without Johnson Valley, the Corps has no base large enough. Environmentalists' concern is based on a tortoise relocation done in 2008 at the Army's Fort Irwin, east of Twentynine Palms. The program was suspended after one year when about 30 percent of the tortoises died. The Marines assert that the Fort Irwin comparison is misleading, and Brian Henen, a civilian ecologist at the Twentynine Palms base, says the mortality rate of the tortoises that were moved was the same as that of tortoises that were not. Henen suggests that the main cause was really a drought, and federal officials came to the same conclusion when they investigated. Environmental groups disputed the finding. Brian Croft is a wildlife biologist and division chief with the Fish and Wildlife Service. He has sympathy for both sides, and says his agency has dealt with numerous problems related to the moving of tortoises, including ones caused by solar projects and a community college expansion. Croft says, "From everything we know from studying translocation, as long as it's planned properly, it can be done without increasing the mortality rate of the animals." He says that the Fish and Wildlife Service expects to decide in September whether the Marines can go ahead with the airlift.