The oyster farmers have packed up and the buildings have been torn down. The farmers' battle with the park service is over and now the bay will be cleaned up and returned to the marine life. POINT REYES NATIONAL SEASHORE, Calif. — The once-bustling oyster farm at the end of the dirt road looked as if it had suddenly been abandoned. Doors and windows gaped open. Buildings were stripped of everything that was valuable. Inside, the remains of the former oyster business cluttered mud-caked floors: a shopping cart, fishing poles, plastic gloves and office chairs. Farmers had groomed crops of oysters in the clear waters of Drakes Estero for years. Now, bits of yellowed plastic foam that had broken off a floating barge bobbed in the water. It is what remains after a yearslong legal battle between the oyster farmer and the National Park Service, which fought to take back and restore the bay to its natural state. The park service won after spending millions of dollars in lawsuits. The park is now undertaking an uncommon mission. It is returning a landscape to its natural state. It is expensive work that must be completed before the West Coast’s first marine wilderness can be unveiled to the public. “Nature will take over, but we have to do some restoration to help it get there,” Point Reyes National Seashore superintendent Cicely Muldoon said. “We have to give natural processes a fighting chance.” She added, “When we are finished, visitors will have a phenomenal experience.” The waters of the Estero will become only the second marine wilderness in the national park system, joining Alaska’s Glacier Bay. Farmers have been cultivating oysters from the Estero since the 1960s. The Lunny family operated the oyster farm here under a permit from 2004 until last December. The oyster farm’s permit required the Lunnys to remove all farming equipment from the Estero. However, the family argued that they did not have enough money to do so. The park wanted a speedy resolution to the court battle and agreed to a deal. The deal allowed the Lunny family to walk away from the buildings onshore but required the family to remove all oysters in the water. The deal also allowed the former employees who live on the site to stay for at least three months while the government attempts to find housing for them. The oyster farm's former employees will also receive help with their rent. Someday, visitors to the park will kayak and snorkel in Drakes Estero. Explorer Sir Francis Drake is believed to have sailed to this tidal area 430 years ago. But first, the cleanup. The crew spent a week scraping off buildings, docks and rusty equipment. This was where the farmers used to harvest oysters and serve snacks to tourists. So far, crews have removed 660 yards of building material and some 6,250 square feet of asphalt. There was about 40 truckloads of rubble. The expense of restoring the Estero water will also be significant. Officials expect it will take up to a year and cost more than twice the amount of the work done on land. Yet before removing the 5 miles of oyster racks, a large group of government agencies will have to come up with a plan that does not harm plants or animals. Much of that planning will fall to Ben Becker, Point Reyes’ lead marine scientist. He recently launched a small boat into the wind-chopped bay and slowly motored away from the fog-shrouded rolling hills of the seashore. Becker was trailing an underwater camera. The camera will help him and the other scientists figure out how to wrench out an extensive network of oyster racks are held up by roughly 4,700 wooden posts sunk into the Estero’s sandy bottom. The weight of the water-logged wood is estimated at 375 tons, and lifting it out will probably require a powerful hoist. Already a crew on the water was removing the remains of the oyster and clam operation. In one week, workers hauled away 15 tons of oysters, shells, tubes, strings and bags. “I didn’t think there would be as much material left out here as we’ve found,” Becker said, watching the crew haul out hundreds of oyster bags. The bags hit the deck of a floating barge, each one releasing a wriggling tangle of eels and tiny crabs. The Estero’s 2,500 acres are a natural refuge for seals. But they are believed to have moved to other areas to avoid the oyster farm’s regular motorboat traffic. Wildlife biologist David Press said once the marine wilderness is restored, seals might come back to the Estero.