The oyster farm is gone now, and the National Park Service has work to do. It wants to clean up the bay and restore the waters to its natural setting, a marine wilderness. POINT REYES NATIONAL SEASHORE, Calif. — There used to be an oyster farm at Drakes Estero. Now, the National Park Service is taking it apart. It will become wild again. Soon it will be the West Coast's first marine wilderness. Farmers had groomed crops of oysters in the waters of Drakes Estero for years. The oyster farm used to be very busy. Now, it looked as if it had suddenly been abandoned. Doors and windows were wide open. The buildings were stripped of everything that was valuable. Inside, there were cluttered, mud-covered floors. There was a shopping cart, fishing poles, gloves and office chairs. That was what remained after a long court battle between the oyster farmer and the National Park Service. The park service fought to take back the bay. It won after years of working it out in court. It spent millions of dollars to pay the oyster farm and get the land back. The park is now undertaking an uncommon mission. It is returning the area to its natural state. It is expensive work. It must be finished before the marine wilderness can be opened to the public. “Nature will take over, but we have to do some restoration to help it get there,” said Cicely Muldoon. She is in charge of Point Reyes National Seashore. The waters of the Estero will become only the second marine wilderness in the national park system. The other one is Alaska’s Glacier Bay. Someday there may be kayaking and snorkeling in Drakes Estero. But first, it has to be cleaned up. A crew spent a week scraping off buildings, docks and rusty equipment. This was where the farmers used to harvest oysters. Crews have removed about 40 truckloads of rubble. More work is left to do. Restoring the Estero waters will cost a lot. Officials expect it will take up to a year. It may cost twice the amount of the work done on land. Before removing the 5 miles of oyster racks, government agencies will have to come up with a plan. The plan cannot harm plants or animals. Much of that planning will fall to Ben Becker, a scientist in Point Reyes. He recently launched a small boat into the windy bay. He brought an underwater camera. The camera will help scientists figure out how to remove the oyster racks. The racks are held up by about 4,700 wooden posts. The posts are sunk into the Estero’s sandy bottom. The weight of the water-logged wood is about 375 tons. A crew started to remove what was left of the oyster company. In one week, workers hauled away 15 tons of oysters, shells, tubes, strings and bags. “I didn’t think there would be as much material left out here as we’ve found,” Becker said. The Estero is a natural home for seals. But they moved on, probably to avoid the oyster farm’s motorboat traffic. After the area is restored, seals might come back to the Estero.