Monarch butterflies make comeback MEXICO CITY, Mexico — Monarch butterflies have been disappearing, but now they are coming back to Mexico, experts said. Each year, the butterflies make a 3,400-mile (5,500-kilometer) migration from the United States and Canada to Mexico. They spend the winter in the mountains west of Mexico City and then fly back up north. The number making the round trip is less than it was 20 years ago, but this year there has been a huge increase. Alejandro del Mazo is the head of Mexico's protected natural areas. He thinks there were 140 million monarchs this year. He said the three countries are on their way to having 220 million butterflies in the reserve by 2020. The butterflies are small and they crowd together in the forest. Each insect cannot be counted. Instead, the butterflies are counted by the area they cover.  In December the butterflies covered 10 acres. In 2014 they covered 2.8 acres, and in 2013 they were at a record low of 1.66 acres. An acre is 1/6 of a mile. While that is good news, the monarchs still face problems. The butterflies covered as much as 44 acres just 20 years ago. Omar Vidal is in charge of the World Wildlife Fund's office in Mexico. He said the United States, Canada and Mexico should do more to protect the places where the butterflies live along their migration. Milkweed is an especially important plant for monarchs. The butterflies feed on milkweed and lay their eggs on it. Yet milkweed has been disappearing from the United States because of chemicals used to kill weeds and lack of open space for milkweed to grow. The United States is working to grow milkweed on about 1,160 square miles within five years. It will plant milkweed and make certain areas free of weed and bug killers. Dan Ashe is director of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. He said in the first year, the United States planted almost 400 square miles of milkweed. The Center for Biological Diversity is a U.S. group that protects endangered creatures. It pointed out that the butterflies are still down by three-quarters from their highest numbers in the 1990s. The group wants monarchs to be put on the list of endangered species.  "The increase is certainly great news," said Tierra Curry, a scientist with the group. Still, it is just a start. The number of monarchs must grow much larger for them to survive. In Mexico, meanwhile, people are illegally cutting down trees. They are destroying the forest canopy in the reserve. The tree tops act as a blanket that protects the butterflies against the cold. If the butterflies cannot find shelter there, they may be forced into a less protected forest. There, they could be out in cold and rain, said Lincoln Brower, a monarch expert. They could die. The monarch migration is an instinct. No butterfly lives to make the full round trip. It is not known how they find their way back to the same areas in Mexico each year. Some scientists suggest the butterflies may release chemicals. These mark the migration route. The scientists fear that if there are too few butterflies the chemical traces will not be strong enough. Then other butterflies will be unable to follow. Mexican farm communities receive money from the government. In return, they protect the 139,000-acre butterfly reserve. The United Nations has declared it a World Heritage Site, or an important place. The U.N. is a group of countries. Now, Mexico may be able to get money from the U.N. for preservation. Homero Aridjis is a writer and environmental activist. He thinks that better weather helped the monarchs this year. "This does not mean we can ignore one of the main threats to the monarchs now," he said. Cutting trees down in the butterfly reserve must stop, Aridjis said.