Monarch butterflies make comeback MEXICO CITY, Mexico — Monarch butterflies have made a big comeback at their winter homes in Mexico, experts said recently. The area covered by monarchs was more than 3.5 times greater than last winter. The butterflies are clumped together so closely they are counted by the area they cover rather than by individual insects. They spend their winter in the mountains west of Mexico City in the Monarch Butterfly Biosphere Reserve. Each year, monarchs make a 3,400-mile (5,500-kilometer) migration from the United States and Canada to Mexico. The number making the round trip declined steadily in recent years. But the butterflies recovered in 2014, and this winter, the numbers were even better. This December the butterflies covered 10 acres. In 2014 they covered 2.8 acres, and in 2013 they were at a record low of 1.66 acres. While that's good news, the monarchs still face problems. The butterflies covered as much as 44 acres 20 years ago. "The news is good, but at the same time we shouldn't let our guard down," said Omar Vidal. He is the director of the World Wildlife Fund in Mexico. "Now more than ever, Mexico, the United States and Canada should increase their conservation efforts to protect and restore the habitat of this butterfly." Milkweed is the plant that is key to the butterflies' migration. Butterflies feed on milkweed and lay their eggs on it. But milkweed has been disappearing from the United States because of herbicides, which kills the weeds, as well as the loss of open land. The United States is working to reintroduce milkweed on about 1,160 square miles within five years. It both plans to plant milkweed and set aside certain areas to be free from pesticides. Dan Ashe is the director of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. He said in the first year of that effort, the United States had managed to restore about 250,000 acres of milkweed. The Center for Biological Diversity, based in the U.S., noted that even with the rebound this year, the number of butterflies has still declined 32 percent from the average number over the last 22 years. The organization is pushing for monarchs to be added to the list of endangered species. It said that the number of butterflies had been expected to be higher this winter due to good summer weather in the areas where the monarchs breed in the United States. "The increase is certainly great news," said Tierra Curry, a scientist with the organization. But monarchs must reach a much larger population to withstand ever-increasing threats, she said. In Mexico, meanwhile, illegal logging has remained a problem. Cutting down trees without permission has more than tripled in the butterfly reserve in 2014\. Illegal logging had fallen to almost zero in 2012. The forest canopy acts as a blanket against the cold for butterflies during the winter. The logging took place in a particularly sensitive area of the reserve. If butterflies can't find shelter there, they may be forced into forests with less protection. There, they could be exposed to cold and rain that could be fatal to them, according to Lincoln Brower, a monarch expert. Alejandro del Mazo, the head of Mexico's protected natural areas, estimated that there were 140 million monarchs this year. He said the goal is 220 million butterflies in the reserve by 2020\. He praised the cooperation of Mexico, the United States and Canada. "This is a motivation for us to continue building bridges between our three countries, not walls," del Mazo said. The migration is an inherited trait, and no butterfly lives to make the full round trip. It is unclear how they find their way back to the same patches of pine forest in Mexico each year. Some scientists suggest the butterflies may release chemicals marking the migration route. The scientists fear that if there are too few butterflies, the chemical traces will not be strong enough for others to follow. The number of monarchs peaked in 1996, when they covered more than 44 acres. But each time they have rebounded, there were fewer of them. Farm communities in the mountain reserve receive money from the government in return for preserving the 139,000-acre reserve. The United Nations has declared the reserve a World Heritage Site, which may allow Mexico to receive money from the U.N. for preservation efforts. Homero Aridjis is a writer and environmental activist. He suggested that better weather helped the monarchs this year in particular. "This does not mean we can ignore one of the main threats to the monarchs now: the extremely damaging illegal logging taking place within the reserve," Aridjis said.