Monarch butterflies make comeback MEXICO CITY, Mexico — Monarch butterflies have made a big comeback in their Mexican wintering grounds, following large declines, experts said recently. The area covered by monarchs in the mountains west of Mexico City this winter was more than 3.5 times greater than last winter. The butterflies clump so densely in the pine and fir forests that they are counted by the area they cover rather than by individual insects. The number of monarchs making the 3,400-mile (5,500-kilometer) migration from the United States and Canada to Mexico declined steadily in recent years. The butterflies recovered in 2014, and this winter was even better. This December, the butterflies covered 10 acres, compared with 2.8 acres in 2014 and a record low of 1.66 acres in 2013. While that's positive, the monarchs still face problems: The butterflies covered as much as 44 acres 20 years ago. "The news is good, but at the same time we shouldn't let our guard down," said Omar Vidal, director of the World Wildlife Fund in Mexico. "Now more than ever, Mexico, the United States and Canada should increase their conservation efforts to protect and restore the habitat of this butterfly along its migratory route." The United States is working to reintroduce milkweed, a plant key to the butterflies' migration, on about 1,160 square miles within five years. It plans to plant milkweed and designate pesticide-free areas. Milkweed is the plant the butterflies feed and lay their eggs on, but it has been destroyed by herbicides, which kill weeds, as well as a shrinking amount of open land in the United States. Dan Ashe, the director of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, said that in the first year of that effort, the United States had managed to restore about 250,000 acres of milkweed. "It is time for celebration because we see the beginning of success," Ashe said, "but our task now is to continue building on that success." The Washington, D.C.-based Center for Biological Diversity noted that even with the rebound, the number of butterflies is still down by 32 percent from their average over the last 22 years. The organization is pushing for endangered species status for the monarchs. It said in a statement that the number of butterflies was expected to be up this winter due to good summer weather in the monarch's U.S. breeding areas. "The increase is certainly great news, but the bottom line is that monarchs must reach a much larger population size to be resilient to ever-increasing threats," said Tierra Curry. She is a senior scientist with the organization. In Mexico, meanwhile, illegal logging has remained a problem. In 2014, more than three times the number of trees were illegally cut down in the monarch butterflies' wintering grounds in the Monarch Butterfly Biosphere Reserve. Illegal logging had fallen to almost zero in 2012. The forest canopy acts as a blanket against the cold for butterflies forming huge clumps on branches during their winter stay in Mexico. Monarch expert Lincoln Brower said the illegal logging "questions the effectiveness of current strategies to protect the already precarious overwintering habitat of the monarch butterfly." The logging took place in a particularly sensitive area of the reserve. If butterflies cannot find shelter there, they may be forced into forests with less protection, exposing them potentially to cold and rain that could be fatal, Brower wrote. Alejandro del Mazo, the head of Mexico's protected natural areas, credited the three countries for their cooperation. He said they were on their way to achieving the goal of having 220 million butterflies in the reserve by 2020\. Del Mazo estimated there were 140 million this year. "This is a motivation for us to continue building bridges between our three countries, not walls," del Mazo said. The migration is an inherited trait. No butterfly lives to make the full round trip, and it is unclear how they find their way back to the same patches of pine forest in Mexico each year. Some scientists suggest the butterflies may release chemicals marking the migration route. They fear that if their numbers fall too low, the chemical traces will not be strong enough for others to follow. The long-term trend is troubling. The monarchs peaked in 1996, when they covered more than 44 acres. But each time they have rebounded, they did so at lower levels. The species is found in many countries, but experts fear the migration could be disrupted if very few butterflies make the long trip. Indigenous farmers in the mountain reserve have received money from the government in return for preserving the 139,000-acre reserve. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has declared the reserve a World Heritage Site. Writer and environmental activist Homero Aridjis and the chief scientist for Parks Canada, Gilles Seutin, suggested that better weather helped the monarchs this year. "Although thanks to more favorable weather conditions along the monarch's migratory routes numbers in the reserve this season have increased, this does not mean we can ignore one of the main threats to the monarchs now: the extremely damaging illegal logging taking place within the reserve," Aridjis said.