To combat the bug problem in Los Angeles, insect-control experts are releasing thousands of male mosquitoes infected with a powerful bacterium Los Angeles, California residents are dealing with a foreign breed of troublesome mosquitoes. Now scientists may have found a way to bite back. These particular mosquitoes, Aedes Albopictus, also known as Asian tiger mosquitoes, arrived in shipments of bamboo from China and spread across the state over the past four years, cropping up in Los Angeles neighborhoods. Unlike other mosquitoes in California, they can carry viruses that cause the diseases dengue and chikungunya. Both cause severe pain in the joints and muscles, as well as fever. Stephen Dobson, a professor at the University of Kentucky in Lexington, is working to get rid of the problem mosquitoes. Recently, Dobson proposed a plan to the greater Los Angeles County and San Gabriel Valley areas. He will release thousands of new mosquitoes into backyards, which local officials hope will stop further reproduction of their kind. The test bugs will all be male, which do not bite humans as female mosquitoes do. Residents were told the method should help reduce pesticide use and their mosquito population at the same time. The mosquitoes to be released are not genetically modified. They are males raised in a laboratory and infected with Wolbachia, a natural bacteria that effectively sterilizes them. When the males are released into people’s backyards and mate with wild females, the eggs they make will not hatch, leading to fewer mosquitoes. Dobson believes that because the Asian Tiger mosquitoes are still new to California, they can be controlled. How Wolbachia works in mosquitoes is a bit complex. If a male mosquito with Wolbachia mates with an uninfected female, then their eggs will not hatch. Scientists do not yet completely understand the reason that the eggs do not hatch. However, if two mosquitoes that both have Wolbachia mate, then their eggs will hatch as normal, although the offspring will potentially carry Wolbachia. If an infected female mates with an uninfected male, then their eggs will also hatch, although again, the offspring could be infected. Although certain strains of Wolbachia are already common in many species of mosquitoes, the type of the bacteria that Dobson is using does not naturally show up in Asian Tiger Mosquitoes. Scientists had to artificially infect them with the bacteria. Another problem is that mosquitoes only live for a few weeks in the wild. Dobson’s team must release about 10,000 male mosquitoes per acre of land every week, and repeat the process over several months. Dobson chose Wolbachia when he first piloted mosquito releases last year in Lexington, Kentucky. The project had permission from local regulators and the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the government agency in charge of protecting the environment. Another government agency, the National Institutes of Health, has provided about $1 million for Wolbachia and other mosquito control projects. Dobson’s team is using the funds to test the Wolbachia approach again in Lexington, as well as the Los Angeles area and Fire Island, New York. Tom Iwanejko is an environmental analyst at the Suffolk County Department of Public Works, which oversees Fire Island. Iwanejko says, “We didn’t see much resistance to this plan. The community has been receptive to normal methods of mosquito control including using larvicide and spraying of adults for years. We all agree reducing pesticide use would be beneficial.” This is not the first time Wolbachia has been used as a way to hamper the spread of disease by mosquitoes. Scientists have previously used a strain of the bacteria to curb the spread of dengue. However, this is the first time that it has been tried in the U.S. Scott O’Neill is dean of science at Monash University in Melbourne, Australia, and head of an international Wolbachia research group called Eliminate Dengue. O'Neill has been releasing Wolbachia-infected mosquitoes in Australia as well as the countries of Vietnam, Indonesia and Brazil for the past four years. O’Neill is not trying to wipe out the mosquito population, a different goal than that of Dobson. A biological quirk of the bacteria is that it limits mosquitoes’ ability to pass on dengue, so instead of just males, O'Neill releases both male and female mosquitoes infected with Wolbachia. When they mate, the eggs that they produce will hatch and carry the bacteria. His hope is to establish the bacteria among many generations of mosquitoes in the wild so that they will not die out, they will just not be able to pass on disease with their bite. Dobson, however, says he does not want Wolbachia to become established in the U.S., he just wants to control the mosquito population without pesticide. A major reason O’Neill and others are not doing the same, is because covering large amounts of land would require raising and releasing a huge number of the insects. Wiping out one species of mosquito also means that others could potentially fill that gap. In an area like Los Angeles County where there were not any mosquitoes that carry dengue or chikungunya until recently, Dobson says it makes sense to try to target this disease-carrying population, and not worry about competing mosquitoes. “We can’t control mosquitoes with a single approach, and this is a new way with great potential,” says Stephen Higgs, a Kansas State University disease expert. When asked if it could be used more widely he says money needs to be considered, and it should be proved that the costs "per release could decline at a large scale." Dobson and his team are hoping to have gathered enough data by early next year to know if his approach will work on a larger scale. For now, health officials in test areas like Los Angeles are just hoping to knock out their own mosquito populations.