To combat the bug problem in Los Angeles, insect-control experts are releasing thousands of male mosquitoes infected with a powerful bacterium People in the city of Los Angeles are finding a new kind of mosquito in their yards. Los Angeles is in the state of California. The mosquitoes have a nasty bite. The bugs are called Asian Tiger mosquitoes. They came from China. It is a country in Asia. The bugs were in bamboo plants that were sent from there. They spread across California in four years. Leaders are worried because Asian Tiger mosquitoes can carry germs. A germ is a tiny living thing that can make people sick. Stephen Dobson is a bug scientist. He is from the state of Kentucky. Dobson has an idea about how to lower the number of mosquitoes in Los Angeles. He can do it without pesticide. Pesticide is also called bug spray. It is a chemical used to kill bugs. But some bug spray can also hurt people or animals. Dobson will send thousands of new mosquitoes into Los Angeles. The bugs will not bite because they will be boys. Only girl mosquitoes bite. Dobson says Asian Tiger mosquitoes are new to California so the plan should work. Boy mosquitoes are given a bacteria called Wolbachia. Bacteria are tiny living things that are almost everywhere. Some can make people sick. But these don't make people sick. They make mosquito eggs that will not hatch.  A boy mosquito partners with a girl mosquito. Then, the  girl mosquito lays eggs. If the boys had Wolbachia, the eggs will not hatch. Fewer mosquitoes will be born.  Mosquitoes only live for a few weeks. Dobson needs to keep releasing new bugs for the plan to work. His team needs about 10,000 mosquitoes for an acre of land. Some back yards are about an acre. He needs to add thousands of new bugs every week. Dobson first tried Wolbachia with mosquitoes last year. He had permission from leaders. It was the first time that Wolbachia was used this way in the United States. Dobson will try Wolbachia in other places too. He wants to study how it works. Scott O’Neill is a scientist in a country called Australia. He used Wolbachia with mosquitoes in Australia and three other countries. Wolbachia can also keep mosquitoes from making people sick when they bite. O'Neill uses it for this. He sends out boy and girl mosquitoes that have Wolbachia. Their eggs hatch. The new mosquitoes sometimes have Wolbachia. They will not be able to make people sick with their bite.