The gene-altered mosquitoes, all male, will be released by the thousands in Panama. They'll mate with dengue mosquitoes. And the offspring of these brides of Frankenskeeters won't survive. PANAMA CITY — They’ve attracted names like suicide mosquitoes, dead-end bugs and even Frankenskeeters. They’re gene-altered mosquitoes. Panama and a number of other countries are testing to see whether they have a place in in the war against mosquito-borne diseases. Dengue is on the rise worldwide, with outbreaks reported this year in Texas and Florida. The mosquito that carries the dengue virus has spread to 100 countries and potentially exposes 2.5 billion people to the terrible disease. Some 50 million to 100 million people contract dengue each year, of which about 25,000 die, the World Health Organization reports. People with the disease "grow dehydrated very fast. In a matter of hours, the cases can grow more complicated,” said Dr. Carlos Galvez. He is the head expert in diseases that spread rapidly for Panama’s Health Ministry. This has been a particularly bad year for dengue in the Western Hemisphere where the Pan American Health Organization has reported 1.4 million cases. Panama has one of the most developed public-health systems in Latin America. The U.S. military was there during much of the 20th century to oversee the operation of the Panama Canal and left the system behind. Yet even Panama struggles to cope with a type of mosquito known as Aedes aegypti. The aggressive city dweller that originally came from North Africa is the principal carrier of the dengue virus. Teams patrol the streets spraying chemicals in a constant battle against the mosquito. Public service ads remind Panamanians to drain standing water in eaves, buckets, flowerpots and old tires. Mosquitoes breed in that water. Before long, public health officials may have a new tool — OX513A — a genetically modified mosquito from a British company, Oxitec Ltd. Oxitec mosquitoes have been altered to contain a “lethality gene.” When the mosquitoes, all male, are released into the wild, they mate with females but the offspring don’t survive. That’s why they’re called dead-end bugs. Only if they’re exposed to tetracycline, a drug, do the mosquitoes with the male genes survive. These mosquitos are called transgenic. If Panama’s National Biosafety Commission gives the green light, sometime early next year technicians will release tens of thousands of gene-altered mosquitoes in Arraijan. The community is across the canal from Panama City. “We plan to do about 50,000 per week,” said Dr. Nestor Sosa, the head of the Gorgas Memorial Institute for Health Studies, a public research body. “You have to have a proportion of at least 10 to 1 (transgenic) mosquitoes to native mosquitoes. You have to overwhelm them.” If all goes according to plan, the OX513A release will result in a drop in the mosquito population. “If you lower the number of mosquitoes, you lower the possibility of infection with dengue,” Galvez said. Some people oppose using the OX513A mosquitoes. Complaints range from doubts about their effectiveness to concern about whether the impact on the ecosystem has been adequately studied. “There are scenarios in which the dengue could worsen,” said Dr. Helen Wallace, a mathematician who’s the executive director of GeneWatch UK, a British group that monitors genetic science. Wallace said that if the program succeeded in reducing the population of the Aedes aegypti mosquito another mosquito could develop and carry the virus. “It could be harder to get rid of than the targeted mosquito,” she said. Another critic, Camilo Rodriguez-Beltran, a French-trained biosecurity expert working in Chile, said the gene-altered mosquitoes could cross international boundaries. That could violate international treaties on biosafety. The new mosquito is being developed too quickly to figure out what might happen, he said. A Panamanian environmental lawyer, Olmedo Carrasquilla, said his nation should better educate the public on mosquito control. “Why invest millions in methods and technology when there are no guarantees?" he asked. He added that basic methods are known to work. Sosa, the health official, dismissed some of the criticism, especially about how the transgenic mosquito’s might affect other plants and animals. “The mosquito dies in a few days,” Sosa said. It is not likely to affect the environment. “It’s not that we are doing something that is environmentally unfriendly.” Hadyn Parry is in charge of Oxitec. He said in a telephone interview that his company thought its transgenic mosquito was safer than using insecticides, which he asserted “affect all insects in a given area.” Insecticides can also filter through the animals and environment and remain. The dead-end mosquitoes only affect one species, he said. “It’s a highly targeted sniper’s rifle.” Mosquitoes live for about three weeks. They generally spend that time in an area 200 yards from where they were born. The Oxitec mosquitoes, he said, can always be detected. “You can actually look at any of our insects under a fluorescent light, and you’ll see a red color. This is so important when it comes to monitoring. We can tell how far our insects fly and where they are going,” Parry said. Oxitec mosquitoes have been tested in the Cayman Islands, Malaysia and Brazil, Parry said. He expects tests in India and in the Florida Keys, if state and U.S. officials give the okay. In tests earlier this year in a village in Brazil, Oxitec said it got rid of 96 percent of the dengue mosquito. Health experts say they need more tools to combat dengue. They encourage the drug companies that are racing to create a vaccine. But research is costly and slow, partly because there are four virus types for dengue, each different.