To combat the bug problem in Los Angeles, insect-control experts are releasing thousands of male mosquitoes infected with a powerful bacterium Residents of Los Angeles County, California are biting back at an infestation of mosquitoes. The bugs are Aedes Albopictus, also known as Asian tiger mosquitoes. The insects arrived in shipments of bamboo from China and spread across the state over the past four years. Now they are cropping up in Los Angeles neighborhoods. Unlike other mosquitoes in California, they can carry viruses that cause the diseases dengue and chikungunya. Both cause severe pain in the joints and muscles, and fever. Stephen Dobson is a bug scientist and professor at the University of Kentucky in Lexington. Dobson recently proposed a unique plan to the California area that will help reduce their mosquito population. He will release thousands of new mosquitoes into area backyards. The test bugs will all be male, and will not bite humans as female mosquitoes do. Residents were told the method should help reduce both pesticide use and their mosquito population. The mosquitoes to be released are males raised in a laboratory. They are infected with Wolbachia, a natural bacteria that sterilizes them. When the males are released into backyards and mate with wild females, the eggs that they produce will not hatch. Eventually there will be fewer mosquitoes. Dobson believes that since the Asian Tiger mosquitoes are still new to California, they can be controlled. The way that Wolbachia works in mosquitoes is complicated. If a male mosquito with Wolbachia mates with an uninfected female, then their eggs will not hatch. Scientists do not yet completely understand the reason. However, if two mosquitoes infected with Wolbachia mate, then their eggs will hatch. In this case, the eggs could carry Wolbachia. If an infected female mates with an uninfected male, then their eggs will also hatch, although again, the eggs could carry the bacteria. Some strains of Wolbachia are already common in many species of mosquitoes. However, the type of the bacteria that Dobson is using does not naturally show up in Asian Tiger Mosquitoes. Scientists had to artificially infect the bugs to use for the test. Mosquitoes only live for a few weeks in the wild, so they have to be replaced for the plan to work. Dobson’s team must release about 10,000 male mosquitoes for each acre of land. They will have to do this every week for several months. Dobson first tried mosquito releases last year in Lexington, Kentucky with permission from health officials. The National Institutes of Health, a government health agency, provided about $1 million for mosquito control projects. Dobson’s team is using the money for the test in Los Angeles. They have also tried it again in Lexington and for the first time on Fire Island, New York. Tom Iwanejko is an environmental expert at the government department that oversees Fire Island. Iwanejko says, “We didn’t see much resistance to this plan. The community has been receptive to normal methods of mosquito control including using larvicide and spraying of adults for years. We all agree reducing pesticide use would be beneficial.” This is not the first time Wolbachia has been used as a way to slow down disease spread by mosquitoes, but it is the first time in the United States. Scott O’Neill is a scientist at Monash University in Melbourne, Australia. He also runs an international Wolbachia research group called Eliminate Dengue. O'Neill has been releasing Wolbachia-infected mosquitoes in Australia as well as in the countries of Vietnam, Indonesia and Brazil for the past four years. Unlike Dobson, O’Neill is not trying to wipe out the mosquito population. The bacteria limits mosquitoes’ ability to pass on dengue, so he is trying to stop the spread of disease, instead of wiping out the mosquitoes. O'Neill releases both male and female mosquitoes infected with Wolbachia. When they mate, the eggs that they produce hatch and new mosquitoes carry the bacteria. His hope is to establish the bacteria among mosquitoes in the wild so that they will not be able to pass on disease with their bite. Dobson says he does not want Wolbachia to become established in the U.S., he just wants to control the mosquito population without pesticide. O’Neill and others are not doing the same because it takes too many mosquitoes to cover a huge amount of land. Wiping out one species of mosquito also means that others might fill that gap. In Los Angeles County there were not any mosquitoes that carry dengue or chikungunya until recently. Dobson says because they are new, it makes sense to target this disease-carrying population, and not worry about competitors. “We can’t control mosquitoes with a single approach, and this is a new way with great potential,” says Stephen Higgs. He is a disease expert at Kansas State University. Dobson and his team are hoping to have collected enough evidence with their tests by early next year. Then they will know if Wolbachia will work on a larger scale. For now, health officials in test areas like Los Angeles are just hoping to knock out their own mosquito populations.