Auto accidents and shrinking habitat are killing urban cats that largely occupy an area surrounded by highways and development, but a proposed wildlife bridge could offer promise. P-32 was one of only a handful of male mountain lions left in the Santa Monica Mountains of California. Last August, driven by the instinct to establish his own territory and find a mate, he navigated three freeways before being struck and killed by a vehicle. He was the 13th lion to die on a highway in the area since 2002. There are only about a dozen lions left in the Santa Monica Mountains, the range running from the Pacific Ocean through Los Angeles, America’s second-largest city. The area from which cats are trying to escape because they are trapped in a too-small livable zone, fenced in by freeways and isolated from the rest of their population. The last documented fresh blood entered the area in 2009, when a single male successfully crossed the U.S. 101 highway and mated once, introducing much-needed fresh genes into the lion population. A single adult male’s home range can extend across more than 300 square miles. The Santa Monicas encompass only about 435 square miles. There is simply not enough land for each of the several males left to establish new territory and find mates, and therefore there is not enough fresh genetic material to keep this population stable. To further complicate matters, inbreeding, lions killing one another over territory and for mates and deaths from eating animals infected by rat poison are also destroying their population. There are neighboring mountains with viable lion populations, such as the Santa Susana Range to the north. However, they might as well be on the moon, because lions are not able to cross the freeway to reach them. The Santa Monica lions are rarely visible, but they are there. One sign is the remains of their kills. A recent kill took place only around 100 yards from the road, but you wouldn't know it from driving by. The scene was shrouded by a patch of trees and shrubbery and was up a steep incline. There was not much left of the victim, a young mule deer — just the head, hooves, entrails, an exposed rib cage and a patch of gray fur. With the incident captured on camera, the culprit’s identity was indisputable. “A female mountain lion with a cub,” says Jeff Sikich, a National Park Service field biologist who has spent the last 13 years studying lions in the Santa Monicas. Sikich, who is renowned for humane capture techniques, has attached GPS radio collars to the cats and uses the signals to pinpoint their position, along with remote cameras to capture their feeding. Popping the camera’s memory card into his laptop computer, he pulled up images from the night before: a kitten with leopard-like spots and its powerful mother, with muscled front shoulders and strong limbs adapted for running down big game. She is all motion, grace, speed and strength. Just because we do not see the lions does not mean they do not see us. Large, close-set eyes give these ghost lions such sharp sight that they can gauge the exact distance of any prey, even of humans. Once these lions roamed our very backyards, the hills we jog, the city itself. Now the Santa Monica lions, the only top predator operating within a megacity, live on borrowed time.  “They’re looking for a way out — especially young males," Sikich says. "Out of all the young males we’ve followed in the Santa Monicas, and I think there’s been 16, none have lived to the age of 2. All have been killed either by being hit on a freeway or running into the adult male in the Santa Monicas.” Being trapped in a small area also causes unusual behavior. Fathers mate with their own daughters and granddaughters and the strongest males repeatedly kill off male relatives, both brothers and sons. Normally, it is rare for males to kill their own offspring, but here that tragedy is common. Sikich estimates the region south of the U.S. 101, where his lions are trapped, is only big enough for “one or two adult males, roughly four to six adult females and kittens, 10 to 15 tops.” Numbers that small “genetically cannot sustain a population in the future without connectivity to areas in the north, across the freeway.” Sikich says this group will die out if something does not change. One solution that has been proposed is to build a safe crossing at Liberty Canyon in an undeveloped stretch of 101, near Agoura Hills. A bridge connecting areas on both sides of the freeway would allow for breeding between now isolated populations. Something similar has been done in Montana and Canada, but never on this scale — never over 10 lanes of one of the world's busiest highways. Liberty Canyon is ideal because it is the most direct path between the surrounding mountains, and lions frequent the area.  The plan is gaining support, but cost is an issue.  “It is expensive,” admitted wildlife ecologist Seth Riley, who has been tracking the Santa Monica cats since 2002. “Estimates are $30 million to get across 101, and then $50 million, which would be the best thing, to cross 101 and a road right nearby.” Still, he said, the cost is really not that great compared with many highway projects, and some of the money has been raised already. Beth Pratt-Bergstrom, of the National Wildlife Federation conservation group, is one of the project's biggest advocates.  "We want mountain lions in the landscape," she said, and "without this happening, mountain lions will disappear” from the Santa Monica Mountains. It will have to happen quickly, though — if one or both of the remaining local males die, it will be all over for the Santa Monica lions.