Go Midwest, young mountain lion KANSAS CITY, Mo. — Mountain lions used to roam most of the United States. People called them by many different names. They were known as pumas, cougars and panthers. In the early 1900s, the number of mountain lions dropped suddenly. Many lions had trouble finding other animals to eat. They were also killed by hunters. Now, mountain lion numbers are growing. These big cats are even starting to show up in the Midwest again. People have spotted them in Missouri and Kansas. When people think of animals roaming in Kansas, they usually think of the buffalo - made famous in the lyrics of the state song, "Home on the Range." Scientists have examined these Midwestern mountain lions. The tests showed that they are related to mountain lions in South Dakota and Nebraska. Still, these mountain lions are not starting any new families in the Midwest. Almost all of them are male. For now, they are simply visitors from the West. Matt Peek is a biologist based in Kansas. He says it would be unusual for a female mountain lion to wander that far. Clay Nielsen studies mountain lions for a group called the Cougar Network. He says young male lions like to spread out. They try to avoid other young males. Nielsen says female lions do not roam as often as males do. They do not travel as far, either. Females like to stay where they will have food, Nielsen said. Certain laws have made it easier for mountain lions to explore the Midwest. Mountain lions in Missouri are protected from hunters. The state has a law called the Wildlife Code. It says mountain lions can be killed only if they are causing trouble. People can shoot mountain lions that try to hurt people, pets and farm animals. Kansas has a law like that, too. Not as many mountain lions have been spotted there. Missouri has had more than 50 mountain lion sightings since 1994. Kansas reported only 10 sightings during that time. Peek says most of these mountain lions are coming from the Black Hills area. It is located near the border of South Dakota and Wyoming. The lions follow a river across Nebraska and end up in Missouri. Peek says Missouri is a better home for mountain lions than Kansas. He says they need wide open spaces and smaller animals to eat. Kansas has plenty of food, just not in the right areas, Peek says. “In the places where the land might be right, there would be too many people,” he said. Jeff Beringer is a scientist in Missouri. He says the state’s 3 million acres of forests are perfect for mountain lions. They are full of raccoons, possums and armadillos - animals small enough to make suitable prey for mountain lions. Mountain lion supporters are glad to see the big cats back in the Midwest. Other people worry about mountain lions being dangerous. “Attacks are very, very rare,” Nielsen said. Nielsen said that many Western states still allow hunting. Nebraska is usually one of them, but not this year. The state had a high number of lion deaths in 2014. Mountain lion hunting will not be allowed this season. Beringer thinks Missouri might allow mountain lion hunting in the future. Peek thinks there will be lion hunting in Kansas, too. People in Kansas would not be comfortable with a larger number of mountain lions, Peek said.