Auto accidents and shrinking habitat are killing urban cats that largely occupy an area surrounded by highways and development, but a proposed wildlife bridge could offer promise. P-32 was one of only a very few male mountain lions left in the Santa Monica Mountains of California. Last August, he set out to establish his own territory and find a mate. After crossing three busy freeways, he was struck and killed by a vehicle. He was the 13th lion to die on a highway in the area since 2002. The Santa Monica Mountains run from the Pacific Ocean through Los Angeles, America’s second-largest city. Today, only about a dozen mountain lions are left in the entire mountain range. The cats are trying to escape because they are trapped in a too-small area. They are fenced in by freeways and isolated from the rest of their population.  A single adult male’s home range can cover more than 300 square miles. There is simply not enough available land in the Santa Monica Mountains for each of the several males left to establish new territory and find mates. There are neighboring mountains with stronger lion populations, such as the Santa Susana Range to the north. However, they might as well be on the moon, because lions are unable to cross the highway to reach them. The Santa Monica lions are rarely visible, but they are there. One sign is the remains of their kills. A recent kill took place just 100 yards or so from the road, behind a patch of trees. There was not much left of the victim, a young deer. Only the head, hooves, guts, a bit of rib cage and a patch of gray fur remained.  The kill was caught on a camera installed by Jeff Sikich, a scientist with the National Park Service. Sikich has spent the last 13 years studying lions in the Santa Monicas. The camera's images revealed a kitten with leopard-like spots and its mother. The mother had muscled front shoulders and strong limbs adapted for running down big game. She is built for motion, grace, speed and strength. Just because we do not see the lions does not mean they do not see us. Large, close-set eyes give them such sharp sight that they can gauge the exact distance of any prey, even of humans. Once, these lions roamed our backyards, the hills we jog, the city itself. Now the Santa Monica lions are trapped and running out of time.  “They’re looking for a way out — especially young males," Sikich says. "Out of all the young males we’ve followed in the Santa Monicas, and I think there’s been 16, none have lived to the age of 2. All have been killed either by being hit on a freeway” or by an adult male. Being trapped in a small area also causes unusual behavior. Fathers begin to mate with their own daughters and granddaughters, which leads to unhealthy inbreeding. The strongest males kill off male relatives, both brothers and sons. Normally, it is rare for males to kill their own offspring, but here it is common. There simply is not enough room for more than one or two adult males.  With so few males and so much inbreeding, it is difficult for the population to remain stable.  Sikich estimates the region south of the U.S. 101 highway, where his lions are trapped, is only big enough for “one or two adult males, roughly four to six adult females and kittens, 10 to 15 tops.” Sikich says this group will die out if something does not change and they are unable to breed with other lion populations. One solution is to build a safe crossing at Liberty Canyon in an undeveloped stretch of 101, near Agoura Hills. A bridge connecting areas on both sides of the freeway would allow now isolated populations to reach each other. Something similar has been done in Montana and Canada. However, it has never been done on this scale, over 10 lanes of one of the world's busiest highways. Liberty Canyon is ideal because it is the most direct path between the surrounding mountains, and lions frequent the area.  The plan is gaining support, but cost is a problem. “It is expensive,” admitted wildlife ecologist Seth Riley, who has been tracking the Santa Monica cats since 2002. Current estimates are that it would cost $80 million to cross 101 and a nearby road, he said.  Still, he said, the cost is really not that great compared with many highway projects, and some of the money has been raised already. Beth Pratt-Bergstrom, director of the National Wildlife Federation’s California branch, is one of the project's biggest supporters.  Without a bridge over the highway, she said, mountain lions will disappear from the Santa Monica Mountains altogether. There is not much time left to act, either. If the few remaining local males die before anything is done, it will be all over for the Santa Monica lions.