Auto accidents and shrinking habitat are killing urban cats that largely occupy an area surrounded by highways and development, but a proposed wildlife bridge could offer promise. The mountain lion known as P-32 was one of the only males left in the Santa Monica Mountains of California. Last August, he set out to find his own territory.  P-32 managed to cross three busy highways. Then he was struck and killed by a car. He was the 13th lion to die on a highway in the area since 2002. The Santa Monica Mountains run through Los Angeles, America’s second-largest city. Today only around a dozen mountain lions are left in the entire mountain range.  The cats are trying to search out new space because they are trapped in an area that is too small for them. They are fenced in by highways and separated from other lions in nearby mountains.  Grown male mountain lions each have their own territory, which can stretch out over more than 300 square miles. Other grown males cannot enter their territory without a fight. Usually, young males leave their parents when they reach a certain age. They look for their own territory and for female lions to mate with. The Santa Monica Mountains do not have enough usable land for all of the lions. There just is not enough space for each of the few males left to establish new territory. There are neighboring mountains with bigger lion populations, such as the Santa Susana Range. However, they might as well be on the moon. The lions are unable to cross the busy highway to reach them. The Santa Monica lions are rarely visible, but they are there. One sign is the remains of their kills. Not long ago a kill took place around 100 yards from the road, behind a patch of trees. The victim was a young deer. Only the head, hooves, guts, a bit of rib cage and a patch of gray fur remained.  The kill was caught on a camera put there by Jeff Sikich. He is a scientist working for the National Park Service. Sikich has spent the last 13 years studying the Santa Monica lions. Sikich's camera shows a kitten and its mother. The kitten has spots like a leopard. The mother looks to be strong, graceful and fast. Once, these lions roamed a much larger area. Now they are trapped and running out of space and time.  “They’re looking for a way out," Sikich says. "Especially young males."  Being trapped in a small area makes the lions behave in unusual ways. Fathers mate with their own daughters and granddaughters. The strongest males kill off male relatives, both brothers and sons.  Normally, males rarely kill their own sons, but here they often do. There simply is not enough room for the lions to live together peacefully.  Of the 16 young males Sikich has tracked, none have lived past the age of 2. Some were killed when they tried to cross a highway. Others were killed by an older male. Sikich says the area where his lions are trapped is far too small. It is only big enough for one or two fully grown males, four to six females and 10 to 15 kittens. Sikich says the group will die out if something does not change. One possible answer is to build a bridge over the highways. A bridge would allow separated lion populations to reach each other.  The best spot to build a bridge is at Liberty Canyon. A bridge there would provide the most direct path between neighboring mountain ranges. The plan is gaining support, but cost is a problem. “It is expensive,” admitted scientist Seth Riley, who has been tracking the Santa Monica cats since 2002. It will cost $80 million to build a bridge, he said.  Still, the cost is really not that much when compared with many highway projects, Riley said. Some of the money has been raised already. There is not much time left to act. If the few remaining males die before anything is done, it will be all over for the remaining Santa Monica lions.