Auto accidents and shrinking habitat are killing urban cats that largely occupy an area surrounded by highways and development, but a proposed wildlife bridge could offer promise. The mountain lion was called P-32. Scientists gave him that name. He was one of the very few lions left in the Santa Monica Mountains of California. Last summer, he wandered out of the mountains.  P-32 was looking for a new place to live. He wanted new territory, land that would be his own.  P-32 crossed three busy highways. Then he was hit and killed by a car. He was the 13th Santa Monica lion to die on a highway since 2002. The Santa Monica Mountains run through the big city of Los Angeles. Only about 12 of its mountain lions are left.  The big cats are trying to escape. Where they live is just too small for them.  The lions are fenced in by highways. That separates them from other mountain lions.  Grown male mountain lions each have their own territory. Other grown males are not allowed in. Usually, young males leave their parents when they reach a certain age. They look for their own territory. They also look for new female lions to mate with. The Santa Monica lions no longer have enough space. There is not enough room for the few males left. They are not all able to set up their own new territory. There are mountains nearby where other lions live. Yet they might as well be on the moon. The Santa Monica lions cannot reach them. They cannot cross the highways. Once these lions had much more room to roam. Now they are trapped.  “They’re looking for a way out," scientist Jeff Sikich says. Young males in particular need to find new territory. Being trapped in a small space makes the lions behave in unusual ways. The strongest males kill their brothers and sons.  Normally, male mountain lions do not kill their own sons. Here, they often do. There simply is not enough room for more than one or two grown males to have their own area.  One possible answer is to build a bridge over the highways. A bridge would allow separated lion groups to reach each other. More and more people think that is the right thing to do. It would cost a lot of money, though. There is not much time left to do something. If the last males die, it will be all over for the Santa Monica lions. They are running out of time.