For a long time, a beach in India was covered in trash. Now that it's clean again, more than 80 Oliver Ridley turtle hatchlings have made their way into the ocean. Baby turtles have been spotted on Versova Beach. Versova Beach is near the city of Mumbai in India.    It was a happy sight for many people. The beach has had a major pollution problem. Garbage had built up on the coast. As a result, turtles had left. They had not been seen for many years. Now, they are back. The turtles are called Olive Ridley turtles. They bury their eggs in sandy beaches. The eggs all hatch around the same time. The baby turtles then crawl out of their shells and make their way into the ocean. Their return is a good sign for Versova beach. The area has become much cleaner. That is thanks to a major cleanup effort. The United Nations has called it “world’s largest beach cleanup project.” It has been going on for more than two years. The beach was once a dump yard. Plastic and garbage were everywhere. Now, it is nearly spotless. The man who leads the cleanup is named Afroz Shah. He was overjoyed to see the baby turtles coming out of the sand. “I had tears in my eyes," he said. Shah started by creating volunteer cleanup crews. They pick garbage off the beach by hand.  He also started education programs. About 55,000 people live near the beach. Shah has been teaching classes on different ways of getting rid of trash. He is helping the people keep their environment clean. On March 22, Shah got a call. Some volunteers told him they had seen baby Olive Ridley turtles. The babies were coming out of nests and walking into the sea. When Shah heard the turtles had hatched, he told people who work with the Indian government. He then went down to the beach with a group of about 25 people. Together, they helped protect the baby turtles from dogs and birds that would have eaten them. In the past few weeks, at least 80 Oliver Ridley hatchlings have made the trip. Olive Ridley turtles are the smallest sea turtle in the ocean. They are also the most common. Even so, scientists say they are vulnerable. That means they will become endangered unless things change. Endangered species are animals that are at risk of dying out completely.