More than 80 Olive Ridley hatchlings have come to life on a Mumbai beach that was once covered in millions of pounds of trash. To the delight of many, newborn turtles have been spotted on Versova Beach near Mumbai, a city in India. They belong to a vulnerable species called Olive Ridley turtles.  It is the first time these turtles have been spotted on Versova Beach in decades. The area has been brought back to life in the past two years by a massive volunteer cleanup operation. Mothers of the species lay eggs in sandy beaches, part of an enormous group-nesting process known as "arribada." Once they hatch, babies crawl across the beach and into the ocean. In February, on the coast of the eastern Indian state of Odisha, a record 428,083 Olive Ridley turtles nested at the same time. In the past week, at least 80 Olive Ridley turtles have made their way into the Arabian Sea from nests on the southern end of Versova beach. Their walk is being protected by human volunteers. Day and night, these volunteers are protecting the baby turtles from wild dogs and birds on the hunt. Versova has undergone what the United Nations has called the “world’s largest beach cleanup project” over the past two years. The beach was once a dump yard covered in shin-deep plastic and garbage. Now, it is nearly spotless. The man who leads the ongoing cleanup operation is a lawyer named Afroz Shah. He said he started expecting the turtle hatchlings two months ago when farmers on the southern end of the beach reported seeing turtles in the sand. “The moment we got that news I knew something big was going to happen,” he said.  Then, on March 22, some of his volunteers called to say they had spotted dozens of baby Olive Ridley turtles coming out nests. Shah called the forest department and passed on the information. He then went down to the beach with a group of about 25 others. They guarded the area while the tiny turtles hobbled across the sand, “making sure not one hatchling suffered a death," he said. The Olive Ridley species, thought to be named for the olive-green color of its upper shell, is the smallest and most common sea turtle in the ocean. According to the International Union for Conservation of Nature, however, it is still vulnerable. Vulnerable species are animals that are likely to become endangered if things continue along the paths they are going. Though they nest elsewhere in Mumbai, none had been sighted on Versova Beach in decades due to the extreme pollution problem there. Shah said, “I had tears in my eyes when I saw them walking towards the ocean.” Sumedha Korgaonkar studies Olive Ridley turtles with the Wildlife Institute of India. She said it was possible small numbers of the turtles had been nesting on the beach in past years.  “We can’t say for sure since regular patrolling for turtles nests is not done in Mumbai,” she explained. “Beach cleanups definitely have a positive effect on nesting turtles." For more than two years, Shah has been leading volunteers in picking up garbage from Versova beach by hand. He has also been teaching villagers and people living in nearby slums how to get rid of their waste in a way that does not hurt the environment. About 55,000 people live along the beach and the waterways that feed it in crowded Mumbai. Shah said he taught them by example, offering to clean public toilets and pick up garbage himself before he ever asked for their help. “For the first six to eight weeks, nobody joined,” he said. “Then two men approached me and said, very politely, ‘Please sir, can we wear your gloves?’ Both of them just came and joined me. That’s when I knew it was going to be a success.” India has some of the most polluted waterways and beaches in the world. One cause has been the rapidly growing population. There is overcrowding in many areas. A lot of this expansion is unplanned, and cities can't keep up. Another factor is the attitude - felt in many Indian communities - that public littering is not a problem. Shah sees that attitude changing as communities are coming together to protect their environment. “There has been a loss of a sense of belonging,” he said.