After decades of being a dumping ground, this 2-mile stretch of India's coast saw more than 80 Olive Ridley turtles hatch last week. Newborn turtles belonging to a vulnerable species have been spotted for the first time in decades on a Mumbai beach in India. The beach has been brought back to life in the past two years by a massive volunteer cleanup operation. At least 80 Olive Ridley turtles have made their way into the Arabian Sea from nests on the southern end of Versova Beach in the past week. They are being protected from wild dogs and birds of prey by volunteers, who sleep overnight in the sand to watch over them. Versova has undergone what the United Nations has called the “world’s largest beach cleanup project” over the past two years. The effort has transformed the beach from a dump yard covered in shin-deep plastic and garbage, to a nearly pristine piece of coastline. The man who leads the ongoing cleanup operation is a lawyer named Afroz Shah. He said he started anticipating the turtle hatchlings two months ago when farmers on the southern end of the 2-mile beach reported seeing turtles in the sand. “The moment we got that news I knew something big was going to happen,” he told the Guardian. On March 22, some of his volunteers called to say they had spotted dozens of baby Olive Ridley turtles emerging from their nests. He called the forest department and passed on the information. He then went down to the beach with about 25 others and guarded the area while the tiny creatures hobbled across the sand, “making sure not one hatchling suffered a death,” he said. The Olive Ridley species, thought to be named for the olive-green hue of its upper shell, is the smallest and most abundant sea turtle in the ocean. However, it is still classified as vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. Vulnerable species are animals that are likely to become endangered unless significant changes are made. Mothers of the species lay eggs in an enormous mass-nesting process known as arribada. In February on the coast of the eastern Indian state of Odisha, a record 428,083 Olive Ridley turtles nested at the same time. Though they nest elsewhere in Mumbai, none had been sighted on Versova Beach in decades due to the extreme pollution problem there. Shah said, “I had tears in my eyes when I saw them walking towards the ocean.” Sumedha Korgaonkar, who studies Olive Ridley turtles with the Wildlife Institute of India, said it was possible small numbers of the turtles had been nesting on the beach in past years.  “We can’t say for sure since regular patrolling for turtles nests is not done in Mumbai,” she said. “Beach cleanups definitely have a positive effect on nesting turtles. Many beaches which are major nesting sites are cleaned prior and during the nesting season by villagers, which increases the chances of getting nests [there].” For more than two years, Shah has been leading volunteers in manually picking up garbage from Versova Beach. He has also been teaching villagers and people living in nearby slums ways of getting rid of their waste while keeping the area clean in the long term. About 55,000 people live along the beach and the waterways that feed it in the crowded megacity. Shah said he taught them by example, offering to clean public toilets and pick up garbage himself before he ever asked for their help. “For the first six to eight weeks, nobody joined,” he said. “Then two men approached me and said, very politely, ‘Please sir, can we wear your gloves?’ Both of them just came and joined me. That’s when I knew it was going to be a success.” He said the team had cleaned 28 million pounds of trash from the beach in the past two years and are still going strong. India has some of the most polluted waterways and beaches in the world due to rapid growth, the unplanned expansion of cities, overpopulation and neglectful environmental attitudes, including allowing litter. “There has been a loss of a sense of belonging,” Shah said. “You can have laws, policies, regulations in place, but if the community doesn’t have a sense of belonging, you can see what happens.”