After two years of work by people to clean the area, more than 80 Olive Ridley turtles have hatched on land that was once completely covered in garbage. Baby turtles have been spotted on Versova Beach, near the Indian city Mumbai. They are a species called Olive Ridley turtles. Their appearance has brought joy to many. It is the first time they have been spotted on the beach in many years. Their return is a sign of how much cleaner the beach has become, thanks to a years-long cleanup effort. Oliver Ridely turtles bury their eggs in sandy beaches. Their nesting process is known as arribada. The eggs all hatch around the same time. The baby turtles then crawl out of their shells and make their way into the ocean. In the past few weeks, at least 80 baby Oliver Ridely turtles have made their way into the Arabian Sea from nests on Versova Beach. They are getting protection, along the way, from human volunteers. Day and night, volunteers are guarding the turtles from other animals. Versova has undergone what the United Nations has called the “world’s largest beach cleanup project” over the past two years. The beach was once a dump covered in shin-deep plastic and garbage. Now, it is nearly spotless. The man who leads the ongoing cleanup operation is a lawyer named Afroz Shah. He said he started expecting the turtle hatchlings two months ago. Around that time, farmers on the southern end of the beach reported seeing turtles in the sand. “The moment we got that news I knew something big was going to happen,” he said.  Then, on March 22, he got a call from some volunteers. They said they had seen dozens of baby Olive Ridley turtles coming out of nests. Shah called the forest department and passed on the information. He then went down to the beach with a group of about 25 others. They guarded the area while the tiny turtles hobbled across the sand, “making sure not one hatchling suffered a death," he said. Olive Ridley turtles are the smallest and most common sea turtle in the ocean according to the International Union for Conservation of Nature, but they are still vulnerable. Vulnerable animals are those that are at risk of becoming endangered unless things change. Olive Ridley turtles had not been seen on Versova beach in many years. They were nesting elsewhere, Shah said, because of the bad pollution problem there.  “I had tears in my eyes when I saw them walking towards the ocean,” he said. India has some of the most polluted waterways and beaches in the world. One cause has been the speed of population growth. There is overcrowding in many areas, and cities are growing and multiplying to try to keep up. A lot of this expansion is unplanned. Another cause of pollution is that many Indians think that littering is OK. Shah has been trying to change that view for a long time. Two years ago, he began leading volunteer cleanup crews. They walked Versova Beach and picked up garbage by hand.  Shah also started education programs. About 55,000 people live along the beach and the nearby waterways. Shah has been teaching members of the community about different ways of getting rid of their waste. He hopes to help them keep their environment clean. When he started, Shah taught them by example. He cleaned up public toilets and picked up garbage himself, not asking others for help. “For the first six to eight weeks, nobody joined,” he said. “Then two men approached me and said, very politely, ‘Please sir, can we wear your gloves?’ Both of them just came and joined me. That’s when I knew it was going to be a success.”