Japan's deer population is outpacing its human population and officials are becoming alarmed. TOKYO, Japan - Many people like to visit Nara, a city in Japan. They come to see its old Buddhist and Shinto sites. Nara is also famous for its deer.  There are about 1,200 deer in Nara. The animals walk freely in the park.  The number of deer in Nara is about to get smaller. Nara is starting its first cull of the deer. A cull is when a certain number of animals are killed. These deer are special. They were named a treasure by the Japanese government back in 1957. Nara leaders had to ask to be allowed to kill the deer. They said that the deer have been eating too much of the food people were growing. City leaders started setting out traps to try to catch 120 of the deer. They were setting traps outside the park.  The deer will be caught in the traps. Then the deer will be killed. Some Japanese newspapers are not saying the deer will be killed.  Yuichiro Kitabata works for the Nara park office. He said that some people are upset. They do not want deer in the park to be killed. Kitabata said they are only capturing and killing deer outside the park. The city of Nara made a new law last year. Nara park will be a protected area. Deer will be safe when they are in Nara park.  There is one problem, though. The deer do not know if they are inside the safe area. They usually wander in and out.   The deer are eating people's food. They can be a danger to people too. The deer are used to tourists feeding them. They eat special deer crackers that are for sale all around the park. The deer can be pushy to try to get the crackers. They are not afraid of people. Last year, 121 people were hurt by deer in the park. Most of the accidents happened while people were feeding the deer. Most accidents were not too bad. A few were serious, though. One person broke a bone and six people needed stitches. The park has hung up signs in different languages. The signs warn visitors about the deer. The deer will bite and push people, the signs say.  The deer are not shy, maybe because there are so many of them. There are twice as many deer as people in Nara. One group does not want so many deer to be killed. So, the group is trying to fix the deer problem another way. They are allowing people to adopt a deer and take it home. No one knows yet if people have adopted any of the deer.