Japan's deer population is outpacing its human population and officials are becoming alarmed. TOKYO, Japan - Many people come to the ancient Japanese city of Nara to see its old Buddhist temples and Shinto shrines. It is also famous for its deer. Every year, many tourists come to Nara. They come to see the historic sites and the 1,200 or so deer that freely walk through the park in the middle of these sites. However, the number of deer in Nara is about to get smaller. The city government is starting its first cull of the deer. A cull is when certain animals or a certain number of animals are selected to be killed. The deer in Nara were named a natural treasure by the Japanese government in 1957. So Nara officials asked the Cultural Affairs Agency in Tokyo for permission to cull the deer. They said that the deer caused damage to crops. The deer are blamed for eating rice, bamboo and vegetable crops. Permission was granted. City leaders have already started setting out box traps to try to capture 120 of the deer just outside the park. The captured deer will then be killed. This detail is curiously missing from most Japanese newspaper reports. Yuichiro Kitabata works for the Nara park office. The office had received some complaints from local people about the cull. But he said the deer being killed were not the ones in the park but outside it. The city of Nara made a new law last year. Nara park will be a highly protected area. Deer will still be protected in the area around it, but they will not be as protected as the deer in the park. Deer will be safe in Nara park but less safe outside its border.  Outside the park, deer damaging farmers' crops can be captured and killed. Also, deer anywhere else can be caught and killed for any reason, the Japan Times reported last year. Officials such as Kitabata have been saying that the deer in the park are safe. However, deer do not know the difference between the zones.  "Nara has a long history of people living side by side with deer," another government official told a daily newspaper in Japan. The official said people want to live near the deer. However, they do not want the deer to destroy their crops.  The deer in and around Nara park have become a danger to people as well as crops. The deer have grown used to tourists feeding them special deer crackers that are for sale all around the park. The deer can be aggressive trying to get the crackers. They are not afraid of people.  A record 121 people were injured by deer in the park last year, according to government reports.  The majority of the injuries happened while tourists were feeding the deer. A few injuries were serious. One person broke a bone and six people needed stitches. The park has put up signs in English, Chinese and Korean. The signs are warning visitors about being bitten or charged at by deer. It is not just their behavior but their numbers that are a problem. Japan's human population has been getting smaller. Deer now outnumber humans in Nara by almost 2 to 1\. Experts estimate that could rise in the next five years. The group "Let's Make The Deer Population More Sustainable And Enjoy Nara Again Friendship Association" is also trying to solve the deer problem. They do not want to kill the deer. They are allowing people to adopt a deer and take it home. The group hopes that this will be a kinder way of dealing with the animals, Rocket News reported. There is no word yet on how many people have taken the group up on its offer.