Narwhal population is recorded Narwhals are little whales. These whales have gotten attention in the last few years. They are called the "unicorns of the sea." They live in the Arctic Ocean near the North Pole. People have made toys like them and written songs about them. One song is about a narwhal eating a bagel. Scientists want to know more about the whales. It has been hard to learn about them. Narwhals live in cracks in the ice in a hard-to-reach part of the world. Scientists are learning more, though.  Scientists tagged a group of whales with a new kind of device. It let them hear recordings of the animals' noises. They use clicks and other noises to hunt and talk. The Arctic Ocean is warming. Earth's climate is heating up. This global warming comes from burning fossil fuels like oil, gas and wood. Burning them creates greenhouse gases. The gases are trapped in the air above. They make the world hotter. Recording Narwhal Noises Scientists think more people will be around narwhals as the Arctic warms. People will travel or send ships through. Others will look for oil under the ocean. Scientists want to see if the noise from people bothers the whales. They plan to do more studies later.  For the new study, scientists looked at narwhals in Greenland. Greenland is an island. It is mostly inside the Arctic Circle. Scientists put devices on six narwhals.  The device can stick to a narwhal's back for three to eight days. Then it comes off. It floats to the top of the ocean where scientists can get it. The team recorded hours of narwhal sounds.  Clicking, Buzzing And Squeaking - Alan Burdick works at the New Yorker. He wrote that the recordings show how the whales use sound. The animals make clicking and buzzing sounds in the deep sea. They buzzed quite a bit in one place. It appeared they were using sound to hunt fish. The noises might help them find the fish.   Narwhals made squeaky sounds when they were near the top of the water. Those were probably to talk to other narwhals.  Susanna Blackwell wrote the study. The study shows some of the history of the whales. Blackwell said living in ice kept the narwhals away from scientists. The new tools let people listen for days, she said.  More information is still needed. It will let people work to make sure narwhals stay around, Blackwell says.