Narwhal population is recorded Narwhals are whales that are known as "unicorns of the sea." The males have a long tusk that comes out from above their mouth like a horn.   These little whales have been having a moment in the last few years. The barely-seen creatures have gone from unappreciated Arctic Ocean animals to meme subjects, plush toys and the topic of weird songs. One tune is about a narwhal eating a bagel.  Despite their popularity, researchers still don't know as much about the whales as they'd like. It is mainly because the animals live among cracks in the ice in one of the most remote and harsh regions in the world. However, Leah Rosenbaum at ScienceNews reports that biologists were recently able to tag a group of the whales with a new type of device. It allowed them to get the most detailed recordings yet of the animals' noises. They use clicks, whirs and buzzes to hunt and communicate, especially at times of the year when sunlight is scarce. The researchers wanted to get more information on narwhal communication to provide a baseline for future research. As the Arctic warms and ice crumbles as the Earth's climate heats up, many areas where narwhals live will be open to human activities. It is expected there will be more oil exploration, shipping and tourism. Researchers want to understand how the noise from humans will affect the whales. New Device Yields Great Results - For the new study in the journal PLoS One, researchers looked at the remote and little-studied narwhals of Scoresby Sound in eastern Greenland. It is an island between the North Atlantic and Arctic oceans. Scientists tagged six narwhals, including five females and one male, with a device called Acousonde.  In previous studies of narwhals, researchers used underwater microphones called hydrophones. Those picked up all of the sounds in the ocean, but could not pinpoint individual animals, their location or what they were doing. Other types of satellite tags last only a few hours. The Acousonde device, however, attaches to a narwhal's back with a magnesium link. After three to eight days, the magnesium breaks down, allowing the device to float to the surface where researchers can get it. The team collected 533 total hours worth of narwhal sounds. They came from whales named Thora, Helge, Frida, Freya, Eistla and Balder. Scientists were able to pair up the recordings with GPS tracking data.  Alan Burdick at the New Yorker reports that the recordings show how the whales use sound. The animals tend to make clicking and buzzing sounds while in the deep sea, about 700 to 2,000 feet down. They buzzed quite a bit in one particular fjord, or sea inlet. It seemed likely they were using echolocation while hunting shrimp and fish. Echolocation is the sound reflection used by animals like bats to find their way and avoid obstacles. Kate Stafford, of the University of Washington, who was not involved in the study, says, "They're like wet bats."  Narwhals Might Be OK With Air Gun Blasts Narwhals made squeaky, whistling calls when they were closer to the surface, often within 20 feet. Those were probably to communicate with other narwhals. In some cases several narwhals were recorded calling at once during a "conference." Susanna Blackwell of Greeneridge Sciences is the lead author of the study. Greeneridge Sciences produces the acoustic tag. The study shows some of the natural history of the whales, which researchers have had an almost impossible time trying to collect. Blackwell said the "pack-ice environment that is narwhals' home for much of the year" has kept them isolated, even from scientists. "Now new amazing tools allow us to take a multi-day, virtual ride on the back of a narwhal!" The next step will be making noises like those of human activity to see how the whales react, reports JoAnna Klein at The New York Times. Exploration crews often use air guns to search for oil and gas under the seabed. The blasts from the guns are believed to damage the ears and internal organs of marine animals. The noise can prevent them from communicating with one another.  Narwhals are used to the incredibly loud sounds of icebergs breaking off into the Arctic Ocean. It's possible that they will just ignore the air gun blasts. Then again, the blasts might interfere with their ability to hunt. "Maybe air gun pulses sort of sound like icebergs for a narwhal — I have no idea — but if we don't have the data, we can't make sound decisions to make sure that we have narwhals in the future," Blackwell says. If we don't have narwhals, who is going to eat our extra bagels?