Gray whales are a protected species ANCHORAGE, Alaska — A gray whale was killed by Native fishermen in Alaska last week. Now, investigators are looking into whether the Native fishermen broke the law. Gray whales like the one that was killed are protected. There are not many of them still alive in the world. For this reason, there are strict rules against killing them. There is more to the story, though. The fishermen who killed the whale are Native Alaskan. Native residents do not have to follow all of the same hunting rules as other residents. Hunting and fishing is an important part of the Native way of life. Also, many Native communities need to be able to hunt and fish to avoid going hungry. They use every part of the animal to feed their families and villages.  The 37-foot whale was killed by hunters armed with guns and harpoons. After it died, it sank to the bottom of the Kuskokwim River. The event took place near the Yupik Eskimo village of Napaskiak. The whale's body was later taken onto land and cut up. There were 20,000 pounds of meat and blubber, or fat, to be shared among several villages. The whale meat was especially appreciated because it has been a hard fishing year for Native Alaskan communities. Much of the salmon fish that they stored this year was ruined by heavy rains.  Officials with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or NOAA, said it appears that the hunters did not have permission to kill the gray whale. Grey whales are off-limits even to Native hunters. "We understand that these Alaska Natives ... depend on the ocean," said Sue Fisher of the Animal Welfare Institute. Still, she said, "they are not allowed to take gray whales." In a similar case last year, villagers in Toksook Bay killed a humpback whale. That led to an investigation by NOAA. In the end, though, no one was charged with any crimes. In the current case, many villagers believe the river brought them the gray whale — they don't think it just swam there by accident. According to the Native Yupik people's beliefs and culture, it would be wrong not to accept it.  "It's right there in front of us," honorary Napaskiak chief Chris Larson told Anchorage TV station KTVA. "It's like a gift from someone to the community." Eastern Pacific gray whales are a familiar sight in Alaska waters. They feed in the Bering, Chukchi and Beaufort seas in summer. In winter, they migrate down to the West Coast, mostly in the bays near Southern California.  They are no longer on the endangered species list, the list of animals that are almost completely wiped out. They were taken off the list in 1994\. Still, there are many protections for them. Only a small number gray whales in Russia are allowed to be hunted. Bill Howell is the fire chief in the nearby community of Bethel. He was there when the whale's body was being prepared. In fact, he helped cut it up. He declined to comment to the Associated Press, but he told the Anchorage television station that it's important for Alaska Natives to hunt for whales. It's a big part of their culture, he said. Whale meat is not traditional in Napaskiak, however. Whales don't usually enter the local rivers. Some villagers had to search the Internet or ask relatives who live farther north how to prepare it. Sharon Williams is a tribal administrator in Napaskiak. She said she watched the meat being butchered over the weekend. She tasted some of the meat and said it's good raw and boiled.  She also described a moment before the whale's body was cut into. She said that Larson thanked the whale for giving itself to the people.