Gray whales are a protected species ANCHORAGE, Alaska — Federal officials on Tuesday were investigating the killing of a protected gray whale. The whale was killed by Native hunters in Alaska after the massive animal strayed into a local river.  For Native residents in the area, practicing subsistence fishing and hunting is part of their ancient culture and traditions. They utilize every part of the animal to provide food for their families and communities. Without it, they would go hungry. The 37-foot whale was killed last week by hunters armed with guns and harpoons. After it died, it sank to the bottom of the Kuskokwim River near the Yup'ik Eskimo village of Napaskiak. The carcass was later retrieved and cut up, with 20,000 pounds of meat and fat, also known as blubber, distributed among several villages. Officials with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, NOAA, said it appears that the hunters did not have permission to kill the gray whale. Gray whales are off-limits to hunters in Alaska — even Native hunters. "We understand that these Alaska Natives ... depend on the ocean for their resources," said Sue Fisher of the Animal Welfare Institute. She added, however, that "they are not allowed to take gray whales." In a similar case, villagers in Toksook Bay killed a humpback whale last year. NOAA responded with an investigation but it did not result in prosecution.  In the current case, many residents believe the river brought them the gray whale for subsistence food and believed it would violate their Yupik culture not to accept it. Yupik people or Western Eskimo are Native to Alaska.  "It's right there in front of us," honorary Napaskiak chief Chris Larson told Anchorage TV station KTVA. "It's like a gift from someone to the community." The whale meat is especially appreciated in the region this year. Much of the salmon this year was ruined by heavy rains that prevented the fish from drying properly. As a result, the salmon went bad too quickly, Napaskiak tribal administrator Sharon Williams said. The hunting of smaller beluga whales is allowed in the region. Farther north, 11 Native villages are authorized by the International Whaling Commission to hunt bowhead whales. Eastern Pacific gray whales, also called California gray whales, are protected by federal rules, though. The animals are a familiar sight in Alaska waters, but villagers say they've never seen them go up the Kuskokwim River. The whales feed in the Bering, Chukchi and Beaufort seas in summer. They migrate south along the West Coast, mostly in the bays of Baja California, each winter to breed. They were taken off the endangered species list in 1994\. Today, only a small number are allowed by the International Whaling Commission to be harvested by Russian hunters. Bill Howell is the fire chief in the nearby community of Bethel. He was there when the whale's body was being prepared. In fact, he helped cut it up. He declined to comment to the Associated Press, but he told the Anchorage television station that it's important for Alaska Natives to fish for marine mammals. It's a big part of their culture, he said. "Whales of this nature are very rare but I think it's something they are entitled to because of their tradition," said Howell, who owns a meat-cutting business. Whale meat is not traditional in the area, however. Some locals told Bethel radio station KYUK that they would search the Internet or ask relatives who live farther north how to prepare it. Williams said she watched the meat being butchered over the weekend, and she tried whale meat herself, saying it was good raw and boiled. Before the butchering began, Larson thanked the whale for giving itself to the people, Williams said. As the meat was being cut, people from area villages stopped by to pick some up to take home.