Navy's marine mammal branch SAN DIEGO — Dolphins and sea lions protect the United States. Puanani is one of them. She is a bottlenose dolphin. She is nearly 8 feet long and weighs 427 pounds. Her name means "beautiful flower" in Hawaiian. The U.S. Navy has trained Puanani and other dolphins to find mines. Mines are underwater bombs. Puanani travels around the world to protect ships from mines. The Navy has 90 dolphins and 50 California sea lions. They belong to a special program for sea animals. They are able to do what people cannot do. Dolphins and sea lions are smart animals, said Mark Xitco. He works with the sea animal program. They are able to think on the own. Dolphins and sea lions can see and hear well underwater. They can dive down to several hundred feet. They are also natural hunters. Training them to find mines can take several years. It takes them time to trust their trainers, said Mark Patefield. He is Puanani's head trainer. Sometimes people swim where they should not be. Sea lions are trained to find them. Trainer Chris Harris is practicing an exercise with Joe. Joe is a sea lion. He has been sent on missions many times. Joe's mission today is to capture an enemy. Harris signals Joe to begin his dive. Within a minute, Joe splashes to the surface. A Navy diver, who was pretending to be an enemy, follows him. The diver gives a thumbs-up. Joe has done his job. Harris praised Joe and threw him a fish. The sea lion is strong and healthy, Harris said. You can depend on him. The program also has several underwater drones. A drone is an Unmanned Underwater Vehicle, or UUV. It is 11 feet long and weighs 600 pounds. Some UUVs are remote controlled. The drone has a computer inside it, like a robot. Someday the UUVs may replace the sea animals. It will not be for a while, though. The dolphins and sea lions are good at what they do. Until then, both will protect U.S. ships and ports. Sharks and whales, though, cannot be trained. The trainers are with the animals all the time. Every morning, they check how the dolphins look and feel. They also see how much they eat. On a recent morning, Nitro was making squeaking sounds. Nitro is a "star" mine hunter. “That’s a good sign,” said Nitro’s lead trainer, Amanda Naderer. “He’s ready to go to work.”