Navy's marine mammal branch SAN DIEGO — A dolphin and a drone sit side by side on a U.S. Navy dock. They will spend the morning training to detect underwater explosives or maybe learn to guard a shipping port against an attack. The dolphin is Puanani, a sleek 7 feet, 10 inches long and 427 pounds. The drone is an Unmanned Underwater Vehicle, or UUV. It's 11 feet long and 600 pounds. Puanani, a bottlenose dolphin, was born in the Gulf of Mexico and was first trained by the U.S. Navy in Hawaii. The UUV was built by Hydroid Inc., a Massachusetts company that designs drones for sea exploration and defense. Underwater drones are operated by remote control or an onboard computer, like a robot. Both machine and marine animal are assigned to a mission that Navy officials say is increasingly critical. Their job is to thwart attacks aimed at the United States or ships stationed in foreign countries. In San Diego, the Navy has 90 dolphins and 50 California sea lions in a program run by the Space and Naval Warfare System Pacific. Nearly every day the animals train in San Diego Bay or in the ocean beyond Point Loma. The program also includes several underwater drones. Dolphins and the sea lions, using their keen eyesight and “biological sonar,” are expert at finding mines. The underwater explosive devices can destroy ships or submarines. The marine mammals produce calls and then use their sonar to listen to the echo to pinpoint an object's location. The sea lions are trained to detect any swimmer who is in an area that is off-limits to people who are not in the military. It puts a device onto the swimmer’s leg and then brings a line back to its trainer. That’s the exercise that veteran trainer Chris Harris is conducting with Joe. The sea lion has been sent overseas many times, including to the Persian Gulf in the Middle East. Harris signals Joe to begin his dive. Within a minute, Joe has surfaced, followed by a Navy diver playing the part of an enemy. The diver gives a thumbs-up. Joe has done his job. Harris enthusiastically praised Joe and threw him a fish. “He’s robust, and he’s reliable,” Harris said. Puanani was sent to the Persian Gulf when the United States invaded Iraq in 2003. Mark Patefield, Puanani’s lead trainer, said the dolphin can go anywhere, anytime. “All we need is the word ‘go,'" he said. On a transport plane or ship, the sea lions are kept in specially designed enclosures that are cool and wet. The dolphins travel in fleece-lined stretchers suspended in containers filled with water. The underwater drones are currently sent to the Persian Gulf and to Asia. They have also assisted in search missions, including when Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans in 2005. The sea mammals guard bases at Kings Bay, Georgia, and Bangor, Washington, where the Navy’s nuclear-armed Trident submarines are located. Someday the drones may replace the mammals in detecting underwater mines. Until then, the two share the assignment. “The mammals are the best at what they do,” said Mike Rothe, manager of the marine mammals program. “They’ve evolved over thousands of years to have a remarkable sonar. We’ve been developing the UUVs for several decades.” The first dolphin trained in mine detection was Notty in 1960. President John F. Kennedy liked the idea of using sea creatures for military purposes, and the program expanded. Sharks and whales, though, were found to be untrainable. Each training day begins with an assessment of each animal's attitude, appearance and appetite. “Every day we interact with the animals,” Harris said. The program has male and female dolphins, so every once in a while a baby dolphin is born. The newest sea lions are the nine caught off San Nicolas Island in California in 2013. Dolphins and sea lions can dive to depths of several hundred feet and, unlike humans, do not suffer from the potentially fatal condition known as the bends. Divers can get the bends when they rise to the surface too quickly. Dolphins and sea lions are natural hunters, although getting them ready for detecting mines can take several years. “You need to build up trust,” Patefield said. For decades, the Navy has said its marine mammals are not weapons and are not trained to carry explosives. Nothing forces the dolphins and sea lions to return to the trainers’ small boats, but they have learned they can find their food there. “They are large, smart, socially complex mammals with a mind of their own,” said Mark Xitco, supervisor of the program’s scientific and veterinary support branch. “We can’t force them to do anything they don’t want to do.” On a recent morning, Nitro, a dolphin who is considered to be a mine-hunting “star," was making squeaking sounds. “That’s a good sign,” said Nitro’s lead trainer, Amanda Naderer. “He’s ready to go to work.”