Navy's marine mammal branch SAN DIEGO — A dolphin and a drone are near each other on a U.S. Navy dock. Both the marine mammal and the machine have a mission that Navy officials say is increasingly important. Their job is to guard the United States and its ships against underwater attack. The dolphin is Puanani. She is a sleek 7 feet, 10 inches long and weighs 427 pounds. The drone is an Unmanned Underwater Vehicle, or UUV. It is 11 feet long and weighs 600 pounds. Puanani, a bottlenose dolphin, was born in the Gulf of Mexico. The UUV was built in Massachusetts by a company that makes military machines. Underwater drones are operated by remote control or by an onboard computer, like a robot. In San Diego, California, the Navy has 90 dolphins and 50 California sea lions in its special marine mammal program. Nearly every day the animals train in San Diego Bay or in the ocean. The program also has several underwater drones. The dolphins and the sea lions use their keen eyesight and “biological sonar" to find mines. Mines are underwater bombs that can destroy ships or submarines. The dolphins and sea lions can pinpoint a mine's location by sending out calls and then using their sonar to hear the echo. The sea lions are also trained to detect a swimmer in an area that is off-limits to people who are not in the military. It puts a device onto the swimmer’s leg and then tows a line back to its trainer. That’s the exercise that trainer Chris Harris was conducting with Joe. The sea lion has been sent on missions overseas many times, including to the Persian Gulf in the Middle East. Harris signals Joe to begin his dive, and within a minute, Joe has surfaced, followed by a Navy diver pretending to be an enemy. The diver gives a thumbs-up. Joe has done his job. Harris praised Joe and threw him a fish. The sea lion is strong, healthy and reliable, Harris said. Puanani was sent to the Persian Gulf when the United States invaded Iraq in 2003. Mark Patefield, Puanani’s lead trainer, said the dolphin can go anywhere, anytime. On a transport plane or ship, the sea lions are kept in specially designed areas that are cool and wet. The dolphins travel in containers filled with water. The underwater drones are currently sent to the Persian Gulf and to Asia. They have also assisted in search missions, including when Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans in 2005. Sea lions and dolphins guard the military at Kings Bay, Georgia. They also guard the base in Bangor, Washington, where the Navy keeps its Trident submarines that carry nuclear weapons. Someday the drones may replace the mammals to detect underwater mines. Until then, the two share the assignment. “The mammals are the best at what they do,” said Mike Rothe, manager of the marine mammals program. “They’ve evolved over thousands of years to have a remarkable sonar. We’ve been developing the UUVs for several decades.” The first dolphin trained in mine detection was Notty in 1960. President John F. Kennedy liked the idea of using sea creatures for military purposes, and the program expanded. Sharks and whales, though, were found to be untrainable. Each training day begins with an assessment of the animals’ attitude, appearance and appetite. “Every day we interact with the animals,” Harris said. The program has male and female dolphins, so every once in a while a baby dolphin is born. Dolphins and sea lions can dive to depths of several hundred feet. They are natural hunters, although training to detect mines can take several years. “You need to build up trust,” Patefield said. For decades, the Navy has said its marine mammals are not weapons and are not trained to carry explosives. No force is used to train the dolphins or sea lions. They return to the trainers' small boats because they have learned that is where their food is. “They are large, smart, socially complex mammals with a mind of their own,” said Mark Xitco, who runs the program’s scientific and veterinary department. “We can’t force them to do anything they don’t want to do.”