Navy's marine mammal branch SAN DIEGO — A dolphin and a drone share an important mission. Their job is to guard the United States and its ships against attack. The dolphin is named Puanani. She is nearly 8 feet long and weighs 427 pounds. She is a bottlenose dolphin and her name means "beautiful flower" in Hawaiian. The drone is an Unmanned Underwater Vehicle, or UUV. It is 11 feet long and weighs 600 pounds. It is used for exploration and defense. Some UUVs are operated by remote control. The drone has an onboard computer, like a robot. In San Diego, California, the U.S. Navy has 90 dolphins and 50 California sea lions in a special sea animal program. Nearly every day the animals train to help protect the country. The program also has several underwater drones. The dolphins and the sea lions have abilities people do not have. They have sonar and sharp eyesight. Sonar is a way of finding objects by sound. The marine animals make a noise, and then they use their sonar to listen to the echo to figure out where an object is. Dolphins and sea lions can dive down several hundred feet. They are also natural hunters. Training them to find mines, though, can take several years. The dolphins and sea lions have to learn to trust their trainers, said Mark Patefield, Puanani’s trainer. Dolphins and sea lions guard military bases. They are especially important for finding mines. These underwater bombs can destroy a ship or submarine. The sea lions are also trained to find swimmers in no-swimming areas. When it locates the swimmer, it can put a device onto the swimmer’s leg. Then the sea lion tows a line back to its trainer. Trainer Chris Harris is practicing the exercise with Joe. Harris signals Joe to begin his dive. Within a minute, Joe has surfaced, followed by a Navy diver he has "captured." The diver gives a thumbs-up to show that Joe has done his job. Harris praised Joe and threw him a fish. The sea lion is strong, healthy and dependable, Harris said. Patefield said Puanani is ready to go anywhere, anytime. Both Joe and Puanani have been sent on missions to other countries many times. Someday the drones may replace the sea lions and dolphins. It will not be for a while, because the sea animals are really good at what they do. Until then, they share the same mission. The first dolphin trained to find underwater mines was Notty in 1960. Sharks and whales, though, cannot be trained. The trainers interact with the animals all the time. They start the day by looking at the animals’ behavior, appearance and appetite. The program has male and female dolphins. Every once in a while, baby dolphins are born. No force is used to train the sea lions and dolphins. They are not even forced to return to the trainers’ small boats. But they know that is where their food is kept. They are large, smart, social animals with a mind of their own, said Mark Xitco. He works with the marine animal program. “We can’t force them to do anything they don’t want to do.” On a recent morning, Nitro was making squeaking sounds. The dolphin is especially good at hunting mines. “That’s a good sign,” said Nitro’s lead trainer, Amanda Naderer. “He’s ready to go to work.”