Aiding livestock victims of Nepal quake BHAKTAPUR, Nepal — Three dogs with broken legs have been waiting days for an operation at the Vet For Your Pet animal hospital in this city just east of Kathmandu. After last week’s earthquake, though, veterinarian Pranav Raj Joshi has had to hold off on operating. He has had to take care of his family. Joshi said he hopes to be able to operate on the dogs by Monday. In the first few days after Nepal’s earthquake, Joshi was occupied around the clock trying to help people nearby. “I was out of my head,” he said. “I didn’t know who I was helping; I just kept moving, moving, moving.” Now, however, rescue efforts focused on humans are moving past the emergency stage. People are beginning to look at the earthquake’s effect on animals. In any disaster, the death and injury of animals is difficult for individuals and communities. Surendra Maharjan, 33, lost all five of his cows when his neighbor’s building collapsed on his livestock shed in Shova Bhagawati. He used to make about $35 a day selling milk to nearby shops. “This was my only business, and selling milk is all that I know,” he said. “I don’t know how I will raise my family with all my cattle gone.” In the farming village of Paslang, two buffalo and a goat were killed when the tin roofs of their sheds collapsed during the earthquake. Other cattle were injured. “No veterinarians have come to treat the sick animals,” said 28-year-old Khil Bahadur Ranamagar. Ranamagar said the toll could have been much worse. Because the earthquake happened around noon, many animals were out in the fields. Elsewhere in Nepal, many pets and livestock that survived the earthquake are homeless. In some cases, their owners died. In other cases, their now-homeless owners have been unable to take the animals with them to tent camps or to relatives’ homes. In Bhakatpur, goats are roaming the city’s ancient brick squares. The group Animal Welfare Network Nepal (AWNN) is trying to address the problem. It is working with international groups such as the Humane Society to bring in veterinarians and food supplies. It is also attempting to acquire vaccines and medicines for sick and injured animals. In the capital city of Kathmandu, rescuers are focusing on pets, said Adam Parascandola of the Humane Society. Some were left behind, while others are with families who are having trouble keeping them. “If people are homeless and can’t care for their animals, we need to help,” he said. The aim is to care for pets for a few months and then reunite as many as possible with their owners. In rural areas, rescuers are focusing on livestock, Parascandola said. Contaminated water supplies and the loss of barns can put cows, goats and other farm animals at risk. They are much more likely than usual to become sick. Rahul Sehgal heads the Humane Society's Asian office. He said a typical Nepalese farmer has around 12 animals. Usually, farmers own two large animals, such as cows, and around 10 small ones, such as goats. “Normally, these animals would be out grazing," Sehgal said. However, "after the earthquake, with people dealing with many problems, a lot of these animals are being tethered.” Being tied to a post all day is hard on grazing animals, and many are not getting enough food. Parascandola said one of the big challenges in Nepal is the remoteness of many places. “You can spend a day getting to just three or four villages, and there are thousands of villages — it’s not like other places where we’ve recently had earthquakes, like Haiti,” he said. “Even with the various groups here, it’s very difficult.” Groups like AWNN and Humane Society International realize that not everyone may agree with what they are doing. While humans are suffering so much, some people may think it’s wrong to talk about animals. Sehgal said animal rescue groups will try to get aid to humans as well. “We don’t want to be in a situation where we arrive somewhere trying to help animals and there’s a human dying," he said. "Every team that goes out to help animals will also help humans.”