Aiding livestock victims of Nepal quake BHAKTAPUR, Nepal — Three dogs with broken legs have been waiting days for surgery at the Vet For Your Pet clinic in this city just east of Kathmandu. After last week’s earthquake, though, veterinarian Pranav Raj Joshi has had to hold off on operating. He has had to take care of his family, who are now camped out in his ground-floor storefront. His support staff is off tending to their own households. “I hope by Monday we can do the amputations,” Joshi said Saturday. “The fractures are too severe (to repair), but they’ll do fine on three legs once we can complete the surgery.” In the first few days after Nepal’s quake, Joshi was occupied around the clock trying to help people nearby. He pulled bodies out of collapsed brick buildings and ferried corpses to the morgue in his jeep. “I was out of my head,” he said. “I didn’t know who I was helping; I just kept moving, moving, moving.” Now, however, the initial human-focused search, rescue and first aid efforts are moving past the emergency stage. Veterinarians such as Joshi and animal welfare organizations are beginning to look at the quake’s effect on animals. In any disaster, the death and injury of animals, and the loss of their owners or shelters, has emotional, financial and health consequences for individuals and communities. In particular, there is concern that the carcasses of dead animals could spread disease. Surendra Maharjan, 33, lost all five of his cows when his neighbor’s building collapsed on his livestock shed in Shova Bhagawati. He used to make about $35 a day selling milk to nearby shops. “This was my only business, and selling milk is all that I know,” he said. “I don’t know how I will raise my family with all my cattle gone.” In Paslang, a farming village where most homes were damaged or destroyed, residents said the quake killed two buffalo and a goat when the tin roofs of their sheds collapsed. Other cattle were hurt by falling debris. “No veterinarians have come to treat the sick animals,” lamented Khil Bahadur Ranamagar, 28, whose leg was broken. Farming families in Paslang rely on the animals during years when farming harvests are bad, and often sell their milk. Ranamagar said the toll could have been much worse but since the quake happened at midday, many animals were out in the fields. Elsewhere, many pets and livestock that survived the earthquake are homeless. In some cases, their owners died; in other cases, their now-homeless owners have been unable to take their animals with them to tent camps or to relatives’ homes. In Bhakatpur, goats that were being raised for meat are roaming the city’s ancient brick squares. The animal aid organization Animal Welfare Network Nepal (AWNN) is trying to address the problem. It is coordinating with organizations such as Humane Society International to bring in veterinarians, food supplies and vaccines and medicines for sick and injured animals. The Humane Society's Adam Parascandola said that in Kathmandu, the capital, the main focus is on pets. Some were left behind, while others are with families who are having trouble keeping them. “If people are homeless and can’t care for their animals, we need to help them with food, veterinary care and vaccinations,” he said. The aim is to care for pets for a few months and reunite as many as possible with their owners once their living situation stabilizes. In rural areas, Parascandola said, the main focus is on livestock. Contaminated water supplies and loss of barns, and the shock of the disaster, can put cows, goats and other farm animals at risk for respiratory ailments, hoof disease and other problems. Rahul Sehgal, Asia director for Humane Society International, said a typical Nepalese farmer has around 12 animals. Usually, farmers own two large animals, such as cows, along with around 10 small animals, such as goats. “Normally, these animals would be out grazing, but after the earthquake, with people dealing with many problems, a lot of these animals are being tethered,” Sehgal said. “That leads to stress and also sanitation problems, and then there’s the issue of getting food to these animals.” Parascandola said one of the big challenges in Nepal is the remoteness of many places. “You can spend a day getting to just three or four villages, and there are thousands of villages — it’s not like other places where we’ve recently had earthquakes, like Haiti,” he said. “Even with the various groups here, it’s very difficult.” Groups like AWNN and Humane Society International are mindful that some people may be not agree with the idea of helping animals while people still need assistance. Sehgal said that animal groups are trying to get aid to both animals and humans who suffered in the quake. “We don’t want to be in a situation where we arrive somewhere trying to help animals and there’s a human dying,” he said. “Every team that goes out to help animals will also help humans.”