Aiding livestock victims of Nepal quake BHAKTAPUR, Nepal — Three dogs with broken legs have been in an animal hospital for days. They were all hurt in Nepal's terrible earthquake. Animal doctor Pranav Raj Joshi has not had any time to operate on them since the earthquake happened. He had to take care of his family first. Joshi said he hopes to be able to operate on the dogs by Monday. The earthquake hit Nepal on April 25. For a few days after, Joshi was busy all day long trying to help people nearby. “I was out of my head,” he said. “I didn’t know who I was helping; I just kept moving, moving, moving.” Now, he and others have time to begin thinking about Nepal's animals. Many of Nepal's people have been affected by the loss of their animals. Surendra Maharjan lost all five of his cows when his neighbor’s building collapsed on the animals' shed. He used to make about $35 a day selling milk to nearby shops. “This was my only business, and selling milk is all that I know,” he said. “I don’t know how I will raise my family with all my cattle gone.” In the farming village of Paslang, two buffalo and a goat were killed when the tin roofs of their sheds collapsed. Other cattle were hurt. No doctors have come "to treat the sick animals,” said villager Khil Bahadur Ranamagar. Ranamagar said it could have been much worse. The earthquake happened around noon. Many animals were out in the fields instead of in their sheds. Elsewhere in Nepal, many animals that survived the earthquake are homeless. In some cases, their owners died. In other cases, their owners are now homeless and have not been able to take the animals with them to the tent camps where they live or to relatives’ homes. In Bhakatpur, goats are roaming the ancient city. The group Animal Welfare Network Nepal (AWNN) is trying to help. It is working with groups such as Humane Society International to bring in animal doctors and food supplies. It is also trying to get medicines for animals that are hurt or sick. In the capital city of Kathmandu, rescuers are focusing on pets, said Adam Parascandola of the Humane Society. Some were left behind. Others are with families who are having trouble keeping them. “If people are homeless and can’t care for their animals, we need to help,” he said. The aim is to care for pets for a few months. The group will then reunite as many pets as possible with their owners. Out in the countryside, rescuers are focusing on farm animals, Parascandola said. Many cows, goats and other farm animals were hurt during the earthquake. Many are sick or in danger of becoming sick. Rahul Sehgal heads the Humane Society's Asian office. He said most Nepalese farmers have around 12 animals. Usually, farmers own two large animals, such as cows, In addition, they generally have around 10 small ones, such as goats. “Normally, these animals would be out grazing," Sehgal said. However, "after the earthquake, with people dealing with many problems, a lot of these animals are being tethered.” Being tied to a post all day is hard on grazing animals. Many are not getting enough to eat. Groups like AWNN and the Humane Society realize that not everyone may agree with what they are doing. Some Nepalese might not think animals should be helped while people still need help. Sehgal said animal rescuers will try to get aid to humans as well. “We don’t want to be in a situation where we arrive somewhere trying to help animals and there’s a human dying," he said. "Every team that goes out to help animals will also help humans.”