Aiding livestock victims of Nepal quake BHAKTAPUR, Nepal — The three dogs have been in an animal hospital for days. Their legs were broken during Nepal's terrible earthquake. When the ground shook during the earthquake, buildings fell down. Many people and animals were killed or hurt. Pranav Raj Joshi is an animal doctor. He has not had time to help the three dogs. Joshi had to help his family and other people first. Joshi said he hopes to get to the dogs by Monday. The earthquake hit Nepal on April 25. Joshi was very, very busy for days after. He did his best to help people nearby. “I just kept moving, moving, moving,” he said. Now, things have slowed down a bit. He and others now have the time to think about Nepal's animals. Many animals were killed by the earthquake. Surendra Maharjan's five cows all died. His neighbor’s building collapsed on the animals' shed. Two buffalo and a goat were killed in the village of Paslang. The roofs of their sheds collapsed during the earthquake. Other animals in the village were hurt. Animals are in trouble in many parts of Nepal. Many animals that lived through the earthquake are now homeless. Some animals' owners were killed. Other animals were left behind. Their owners lost their homes and had to move away. The group Animal Welfare Network Nepal is trying to help. So is the group Humane Society International. Both are trying to find doctors and food for animals in trouble. Kathmandu is Nepal's main city. Rescuers there want to help pets. Some pets were left behind. Others are with families who are having trouble keeping them. Rescuers will care for the pets for a few months. They will give them back when the owners are ready. Rescuers in the countryside are trying to help farm animals. Many cows, goats and other farm animals were hurt during the earthquake. Many are sick. More may become sick. Doctors will help the sick animals get better. Many animals in the countryside are not getting enough to eat. Rescuers will bring them food. Some people may think rescuers should not help animals yet. Many people still need help. The animal rescuers say they understand. They will be careful to help people as well as animals.