Best dinosaur specimen in the world In 2011, an extraordinarily well-preserved 110-million-year-old dinosaur was found in a mine pit in Canada. The dinosaur's body, even its skin and dragon-like scales had fossilized, becoming locked in time underground. Since the find, researchers have been studying the fossil carefully. Last Thursday, they announced that the dinosaur belongs to a previously unknown species.  They're calling it Borealopelta markmitchelli. Its name honors the Royal Tyrrell Museum technician Mark Mitchell. He spent more than 7,000 hours carefully removing rock from around the fossil.  Borealopelta markmitchelli is an 18-foot-long, plant-eating, dragon-like dinosaur called a nodosaur. Scientists believe it had a troubled past. The report in the journal Current Biology described it as "the best-preserved armored dinosaur ever found." It went on to call it "one of the best dinosaur specimens in the world." The Borealopelta was first discovered in 2011 by a mining machine operator named Shawn Funk. He was working at the Suncor Millennium Mine in Alberta. The entire animal would have weighed more than 2,800 pounds during its life. The portion of its body that was preserved as a fossil extended from the snout to the hips. Most dinosaur fossils consist of skeletons or bone fragments. This one is different. It's three-dimensional and covered in preserved, scaly skin. "If you just squint your eyes a bit, you could almost believe it was sleeping," said lead author Caleb Brown, a scientist at the Royal Tyrrell Museum where the creature is on display. Brown calls it the "Mona Lisa" of dinosaurs. "It will go down in science history as one of the most beautiful and best-preserved dinosaur specimens," he said. Researchers studied the fossilized skin and found that the plant-eating Borealopelta was covered in armor and resembled a walking tank. However, it likely faced a significant threat from predators like meat-eating dinosaurs. Researchers launched an investigation to find out what color the scales on the new species of dinosaur were. They analyzed the chemical compounds in the dinosaur's scales to determine the coloration of the new species. The creature likely had reddish-brown skin with countershading across its body. Countershading is a protective color pattern that's found on many animals, like deer, zebras and armadillos. It may have helped the Borealopelta blend in with the environment when approached by a taller predator, researchers say. In modern times, however, most animals that have countershading are small and live in constant fear of being eaten, so scientists think that the Borealopelta was probably the same way. It may have faced a real struggle to survive. Brown said that the fact that the Borealopelta, a huge, heavily armored dinosaur, was being eaten by bigger, fiercer creatures shows how dangerous the Cretaceous period, between 145.5 and 65.5 million years ago, was back then.  Scientists are continuing to study the animal for clues about its life, including its preserved gut contents. They hope to figure out what it ate for its last meal. They believe that when the dinosaur died, it fell into a river and was swept out to sea, where it sank on its back to the ocean floor. At the time, Alberta was as warm as south Florida is today, and rivers and oceans likely spread far further inland than they do now. The dinosaur was first unveiled to the public in May, but it didn't yet have a formal name.