Best dinosaur specimen in the world In 2011, an extraordinarily well-preserved 110-million-year-old dinosaur was found in a mine pit in Canada. The dinosaur's body, even its skin, and dragon-like scales had fossilized, becoming locked in time underground. Last Thursday, it was announced that the dinosaur belongs to a previously unknown species. Since the find, researchers have been studying the fossil carefully and they believe it had a troubled past.  The 18-foot-long, plant-eating, dragon-like creature is a new kind of nodosaur. They're calling it Borealopelta markmitchelli, to honor the museum technician Mark Mitchell who spent more than 7,000 hours painstakingly removing rock from around the specimen. The report in the journal Current Biology described it as "the best-preserved armored dinosaur ever found, and one of the best dinosaur specimens in the world." The Borealopelta was first discovered in 2011 by a mining machine operator named Shawn Funk who was working at the Suncor Millennium Mine in Alberta. The entire animal would have weighed more than 2,800 pounds during its life. The portion of its body that was preserved as a fossil extended from the snout to the hips. Unlike most dinosaur fossils, which consist of skeletons or bone fragments, this one is three-dimensional and covered in preserved, scaly skin. "If you just squint your eyes a bit, you could almost believe it was sleeping," said lead author Caleb Brown, a scientist at the Royal Tyrrell Museum where the creature is on display. "It will go down in science history as one of the most beautiful and best-preserved dinosaur specimens — the Mona Lisa of dinosaurs." Researchers studied the fossilized skin and found that, though the Borealopelta was covered in armor and resembled a walking tank, it likely faced a significant threat from meat-eating dinosaurs. That's because it used a shielding technique known as countershading, which is also used by many modern-day animals. Researchers analyzed the chemical compounds in the dinosaur's scales to determine the coloration of the new species. They found that it likely had reddish-brown skin with countershading across its body. This may have helped the Borealopelta blend in with the environment when approached by a taller predator, researchers say. In modern times, however, most animals that have countershading are somewhat small and vulnerable prey, like deer, zebras and armadillos. It suggests that the Borealopelta might have been the same. It may have faced a real struggle to survive among the bigger dinosaur predators. "Strong predation on a massive, heavily-armored dinosaur illustrates just how dangerous the dinosaur predators of the Cretaceous must have been," said Brown. Scientists are continuing to study the animal for clues about its life, including its preserved gut contents, in order to find out what it ate for its last meal. They believe that when the dinosaur died, it fell into a river and was swept out to sea, where it sank on its back to the ocean floor. At that time, Alberta was as warm as south Florida is today, and rivers and oceans likely spread far further inland than they do now. The dinosaur was first unveiled to the public in May, but it didn't yet have a formal name.