Best dinosaur specimen in the world In 2011, a 110-million-year-old dinosaur was found in a mine pit in Canada.  Its body, even its skin and scales, had slowly turned into a fossil. Fossils are the remains of ancient animals, preserved in rock. Last Thursday, it was announced that the dinosaur belonged to a completely new species.  Since the find, researchers have been studying the fossil carefully. None like it has ever been found. They're calling it Borealopelta markmitchelli. It's an 18-foot-long, plant-eating, dragon-like creature.  Its name "markmitchelli" honors the Royal Tyrrell Museum expert Mark Mitchell. He spent more than 7,000 hours carefully removing rock from around the fossil. The new dinosaur fossil is on display at the museum. A recent science journal report described it as "the best-preserved armored dinosaur ever found." It went on to call it "one of the best dinosaur specimens in the world." The new dinosaur was first discovered in 2011 by a mining machine operator named Shawn Funk. He was working at the Suncor Millennium Mine in Alberta. The entire animal would have weighed more than 2,800 pounds during its life. The portion of its body that was preserved as a fossil extended from the snout to the hips. Most dinosaur fossils discovered are of skeletons or bone fragments. This one is different. It's three-dimensional and covered in preserved, scaly skin. "If you just squint your eyes a bit, you could almost believe it was sleeping," said Caleb Brown. He was the lead author of the study and works as a scientist at the Royal Tyrrell Museum.  He said the fossil would "go down in science history." Researchers spent a long time studying the dinosaur's fossilized skin. They found that the Borealopelta was covered in armor. It would have looked something like a walking military tank.  But, they think the Borealopelta had a difficult life. The plant-eating dinosaur was likely in danger of being eaten by meat-eating dinosaurs. How do they know? The scientists did a study on the scales of the creature. They wanted to find out what color they were and discovered they were probably a reddish-brown. It also had something called countershading across its body. Countershading is a color pattern that some animals use to blend in. It's found on deer, zebras and armadillos, for example. It may have helped the Borealopelta remain unseen by other dinosaurs that were taller than it. For the researchers, countershading was a big clue into how the Borealopelta lived. In modern times, all of the animals with countershading are small animals that get eaten by bigger animals. So scientists think that the Borealopelta was probably the same way. It may have faced a real struggle to survive. Brown said that the finding says a lot about the Cretaceous dinosaur period that the Borealopelta lived in 110 million years ago. The Borealopelta is huge, with heavy scales that worked as armor. If it was smaller than other dinosaurs at the time, those other dinosaurs must have been really big. Scientists are continuing to study the animal for clues about its life. They are looking at what is in the dinosaur's stomach in order to find out what it ate for its last meal. They believe that when the dinosaur died, it fell into a river and was swept out to sea, where it sank on its back to the ocean floor. At that time, Alberta was as warm as south Florida is today. It is likely the rivers and oceans spread far further inland than they do now. The dinosaur was first unveiled to the public in May, but it didn't yet have a formal name.