New ape species is endangered Indonesian orangutans first discovered in 1997 appear to be a new species of primate, scientists say. However, the newest member of the family tree that includes humans may not be around much longer. Their numbers are so small they are in danger of dying out. The researchers who have been studying the orangutans released their findings last Thursday.  The researchers named the new orangutan species Pongo tapanuliensis. Compared to other orangutan species, the Tapanuli orangutan's hair is frizzier and its head is smaller. There are no more than 800 of the animals left, making it the most endangered great ape species in the world. The Tapanuli orangutans live on the Indonesian island of Sumatra, and their population is highly vulnerable. The orangutans' habitat has been shrinking as the forest they live in is cut down. ## First New Great Ape Species In 90 Years Steps must be taken to conserve every last remaining bit of forest, the researchers say. Otherwise, "we may see the discovery and extinction of a great ape species within our lifetime." Pongo tapanuliensis is the first great ape species to be identified in nearly 90 years. Previously, science has recognized six great ape species: Sumatran and Bornean orangutans, eastern and western gorillas, chimpanzees and bonobos. The conclusion that the orangutan is a new species was based on three things: an examination of the skeleton of an adult male, a study of behavioral and habitat differences and an extensive genetic study. The genetic study indicates that Tapanuli orangutans split off from other orangutans and became a separate species about 3.4 million years ago. The orangutans are confined to an area of about 425 square miles (1,100 square kilometers) in the Batang Toru forest in Northern Sumatra. The genetic study suggests that the population has been isolated from Sumatran orangutans further north for 10,000 to 20,000 years. Tapanuli orangutans are clearly distinct from Bornean orangutans. Aside from certain obvious physical differences, Pongo tapanuliensis has several other unique characteristics. These include their diet, the fact that they live only in upland areas and the male's long call. ## Survival Of Species Is Important Scientist and primate expert Russell Mittermeier works for the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN). Mittermeier called the new finding a "remarkable discovery." It is imperative that the Indonesian government do everything it can to ensure the species survives, he said. Mittermeier was not involved in the study but said he is "very excited" by the research. Last year, the IUCN classified Bornean orangutans as critically endangered due to a steep population decline caused by a destruction of their forest habitat. Sumatran orangutans have been classified as critically endangered since 2008. Scientist Matthew Nowak did take part in the Tapanuli study. He says the orangutans live in three patches of forest that are separated by non-protected areas. For the species to survive, those three separate areas need to be connected by protected forest corridors, Nowak said. ## Forest Needs To Be Saved Additionally, the researchers say a power plant planned for the region should be stopped by the government. It is vitally important that all remaining forest be protected as much as possible, Nowak said. The Batang Toru orangutan population was first discovered by researcher Erik Meijaard in 1997\. A research station was established in the area in 2006. It was not until 2013, when the adult male skeleton became available, that scientists realized how unique the population was. The genetic study that followed was the largest study of wild orangutans ever carried out.