New ape species is endangered Frizzy-haired orangutans who live on the Indonesian island of Sumatra appear to be a new species of primate, scientists say. However, the newest member of the family tree that includes humans may not be around much longer. Their numbers are so small, and their habitat so fragmented, that they are in danger of going extinct, say the scientists who have been studying them. The researchers, who summarized their findings in a study published last Thursday, named the newly identified primates Pongo tapanuliensis. There are no more than 800 of the animals left, the researchers say, making it the most endangered great ape species in the world. The researchers say the Tapanuli population is highly vulnerable. Its habitat has been shrinking as it faces ongoing development. ## Discovery And Extinction Within A Lifetime "If steps are not taken quickly to reduce current and future threats to conserve every last remaining bit of forest we may see the discovery and extinction of a great ape species within our lifetime," they said. Pongo tapanuliensis is the first great ape species to be proposed by scientists in nearly 90 years. Previously, science has recognized six great ape species: Sumatran and Bornean orangutans, eastern and western gorillas, chimpanzees and bonobos. The conclusion that the orangutan is a new species was based on three things: an analysis of the skeleton of an adult male who had been killed during a conflict with villagers, an analysis of behavioral and habitat differences and an extensive genetic study. The genetic study indicates that an evolutionary split from other orangutans occurred about 3.4 million years ago. The primates are confined to a range of about 425 square miles (1,100 square kilometers) in the Batang Toru forest in Northern Sumatra. The genetic study suggests that the population has been isolated from Sumatran orangutans further north for 10,000 to 20,000 years. Aside from the physical differences that are most apparent in comparison with Bornean orangutans, Pongo tapanuliensis has other unique characteristics. These include diet, restriction of habitat to upland areas and the male's long call. ## Indonesian Government Needs To Help Primatologist Russell Mittermeier is the head of the primate specialist group at the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN). He called the finding a "remarkable discovery." It is imperative that the Indonesian government do everything it can to ensure the species survives, he said. Mittermeier, who was not involved in the study, said he was "very excited" by the research. Last year, the IUCN classified Bornean orangutans as critically endangered due to a steep population decline caused by a destruction of their forest habitat. Sumatran orangutans have been classified as critically endangered since 2008. Matthew Nowak, one of the study's authors, said the Tapanuli orangutans live in three pockets of forest that are separated by non-protected areas. "For the species to be viable into the future, those three fragments need to be reconnected via forest corridors," he said. ## Remaining Forest Must Be Protected Additionally, the authors are recommending that a hydropower plant planned for the region be stopped by the government. It is vitally important that all remaining forest be protected as much as possible, Nowak said. The Batang Toru orangutan population was found during a field survey by researcher Erik Meijaard in 1997 and a research station was established in the area in 2006. It was not until 2013, when the adult male skeleton became available, that scientists realized how unique the population was. What followed was the largest genetic study of wild orangutans ever carried out.