New ape species is endangered A group of orangutans living on an Indonesian island have been declared a new kind of primate. They are the newest member of the family tree of advanced animals that include humans. Of course, the orangutans are not actually a new kind of animal. In fact, they have been around for millions of years. What's new is that scientists have learned they are different enough from other orangutans to be called a new type of primate.  But, the animals may not be around much longer. Their numbers are so small they are in danger of dying out. The scientists who have been studying them released their findings last Thursday.  The scientists named the new orangutan species Pongo tapanuliensis. Compared to other orangutan species, the Tapanuli orangutan's hair is frizzier and its head is smaller. ## Only 800 Of The Apes Are Left There are no more than 800 of the animals left. That makes Pongo tapanuliensis the most endangered great ape species in the world. The Tapanuli orangutans live on the Indonesian island of Sumatra. Their habitat, or living space, has been shrinking. The forest they live in is being cut down. Every last remaining bit of forest must be saved, the scientists say. Otherwise, the Tapanuli orangutans will die out soon. New types of apes are not discovered often. Pongo tapanuliensis is the first type of great ape to be discovered in nearly 90 years. Scientists recognize six other types of apes. These are Sumatran and Bornean orangutans, eastern and western gorillas, chimpanzees and bonobos. Before declaring Pongo tapanuliensis a new species, scientists studied these orangutans very carefully. ## How Tapanuli Became A Separate Species First, they studied the animals' behavior to see if it differed from the behavior of other orangutans.  Second, they examined the skeleton of a male orangutan.  Third, they carried out a large genetic study. Genes are passed down from parent to child. They determine how animals look and act. The genes of the Tapanuli orangutan were carefully examined.  The genetic study showed that Tapanuli orangutans split off from other orangutans about 3.4 million years ago. It was at that point that they first became a separate species. The orangutans live in an area of about 425 square miles in the Batang Toru forest in Northern Sumatra. Sumatra is an island in Indonesia. The genetic study suggests the population has not mixed with their neighbors to the north, the Sumatran orangutans, for 10,000 to 20,000 years. While both kinds of orangutans are on the same island, they are quite different from each other. ## Forest Orangutans Live In Needs Protection Tapanuli orangutans are also different from their close relatives the Bornean orangutans. For one thing, they look different. In addition, there are several things about Tapanuli orangutans that set them apart. For example, they live only in upland areas and eat certain foods other orangutans don't. In addition, the males have an unusually long call. Scientist Russell Mittermeier is an expert on primates. Mittermeier called the new finding a "remarkable discovery." The Indonesian government must do everything it can to make sure the species survives, he said. Scientist Matthew Nowak took part in the Tapanuli study. He says the orangutans live in three patches of forest that are separated by non-protected areas. For the species to survive, those three separate areas need to be connected, Nowak said. There has to be a safe way for the orangutans to move from one area to another. ## Animals Have Been Studied For Years The scientists are also worried about a power plant that has been planned for the area. It should be stopped by the government, the scientists say. It is very important that all remaining forest be protected as much as possible, Nowak said. The Batang Toru orangutan population was first discovered by scientist Erik Meijaard in 1997.  Scientists first began studying the animals in 2006. The genetic study was the largest genetic study of wild orangutans ever done.