New ape species is endangered A group of orangutans in Indonesia are a new kind of primate, scientists say. Primates are a group of related animals. In this group, there are apes and people.  But, orangutans are not really a new kind of animal. They have been around for millions of years. What's new is that scientists have learned how different they are from other orangutans. They are different enough to be called a separate type of primate.  Scientists named the new species or new animal the Tapanuli orangutan. They have frizzier hair than other orangutans. Their head is also smaller.  Before there were six primate species. Now there are seven. Sadly, the animals may not be around much longer. There are so few of them they are in danger of dying out. The animals were first found in 1997\. Now there are only 800 of them left. They are the most endangered great ape species in the world. Tapanuli orangutans live on the Indonesian island of Sumatra. Their living space has been shrinking. The forest they live in is being cut down. Every last remaining bit of forest must be saved, the scientists say. Otherwise, the orangutans will die out. Scientists studied the orangutans very carefully. They needed to be sure they really were a new species.  First, they studied how the animals behave. They wanted to see if they behave differently than other orangutans.  Second, they studied the bones of a dead orangutan.  Third, they studied the animals' genes. Genes are passed down from parent to child. They decide how an animal looks and acts. The gene study provided real proof. It showed that Tapanuli orangutans do not have the same genes as other orangutans. Tapanuli orangutans look different from other orangutans. There are also other unusual things about them. For example, they only live in hilly areas. They eat foods other orangutans don't. The males have an unusually long call. Tapanuli orangutans live in just one part of Sumatra. They are in the Batang Toru forest.  Scientist Matthew Nowak was part of the team that studied the orangutans. He said they now only live in three patches of the forest. These patches are not connected. They are separated by unsafe areas. Those patches need to be connected, Nowak said. There has to be a safe way for the orangutans to move from one to another. They need this in order to survive.