Best dinosaur specimen in the world In 2011, a dinosaur was found in Canada. It was 110 million years old. Its body had slowly turned into a fossil. Fossils are the remains of ancient animals. A fossil can be an old bone or a shell. It can even be an imprint of an animal on a rock. Since 2011, researchers have been studying the fossil. On Thursday, they said it belonged to a completely new kind of dinosaur species. No dinosaur like it had ever been found. They're calling it a Borealopelta markmitchelli.  Borealopeltas were 18 feet long and looked a bit like dragons. They only ate plants. Even so, they weighed more than 2,800 pounds. Its name "markmitchelli" honors a man named Mark Mitchell. He works at the museum that has the fossil. The museum is called the Royal Tyrrell Museum. Mitchell spent more than 7,000 hours carefully removing rock from around the fossil. A science journal called it one of the best dinosaur fossils ever found. Most dinosaur fossils are just pieces of bones. This one is different. It has the dinosaur's body. It even shows its scaly skin. "If you just squint your eyes a bit, you could almost believe it was sleeping," said Caleb Brown. He was the lead author of the study. He also works at the museum.  He said the fossil would "go down in science history." Researchers spent a long time studying the dinosaur's fossilized skin. They found that the dinosaur was covered in scales that protected it like armor.  But, they think life wasn't easy for the big, scaly dinosaur. It was probably eaten by other, bigger animals. How do they know? The clue was the color of the scales. They figured out that they probably had a reddish-brown color. The dinosaur also had something called countershading. Countershading is a color pattern on some animals. Animals like deer, zebras and armadillos have countershading. It helps them blend in to where they live. These animals all have something in common, though. They are small and they get eaten.  So scientists think that the Borealopelta was probably the same way. It may have had a hard time surviving. This was surprising. The Borealopeltas were huge and had a heavy armor. Whatever ate them must have been really big. Scientists are continuing to study the fossil for more clues about its life. For example, they are looking at what is in its stomach. They hope to find out what it ate for its last meal.