Timeless tug of war This tale involves three hunters in Oregon. No one knows what happened, but three hunters were found mysteriously dead around their campfire. And there was a dead, boiled newt inside their coffee pot.  In the 1960s, that tale led scientists to research poisonous newts. They realized that newts were locked in a deadly battle with snakes. Wherever rough-skinned newts lived alongside garter snakes, the local snakes would develop a mutation over time. A mutation is a change in a living thing's genes. This mutation gave the snakes a resistance to tetrodotoxin (TTX), a super-deadly poison made by newts. In response, the newts would evolve to make even more of the poison. The latest study shows that this story began long before newts and snakes even existed. It was published Thursday in Current Biology, a research journal for scientists. Scientist Edmund "Butch" Brodie Jr. first began looking into these newts. He and his son Edmund Brodie III identified this tug-of-war between newts and snakes. TTX blocks certain proteins, preventing cells from functioning. That causes an animal to die quickly. Some garter snakes have a mutation that keeps TTX from working.  The Brodies found that these snakes could have three different kinds of anti-TTX mutations. The oldest of these mutations came around about 170 million years ago, before snakes had evolved. Some snake ancestor must have developed the mutation and passed it on, according to study author Joel McGlothlin. He and the other researchers looked at the genes of 82 different types of animals. These included snakes, lizards, one bird and one turtle.  They discovered that the first mutation in snakes themselves happened about 40 million years ago. It was right around the time that newts appeared. It's not hard to see how this battle began: Snakes evolved to be unaffected by TTX. Newts who made only a small amount of TTX were easy prey. Because of this, the newts evolved to carry more powerful poison. Over time, they became toxic enough to kill three men at once. The researchers hope that other scientists will use their work to understand how other living things evolved. "Certain pathways that evolution might go down are closed off because the right things didn't happen in the past," McGlothlin said. "And other pathways are open because the right things did happen."