Timeless tug of war The story is as old as time: Newt meets snake, snake eats newt, newt changes to produce increasingly deadly poisons. Newt kills snake, snake adapts, snake eats newt and – well, the rest of the tale goes on pretty much forever. This tale involves three hunters in Oregon. No one knows what happened, but three hunters were found mysteriously dead around their campfire. And there was a dead, boiled newt inside their coffee pot.  In the 1960s, the tale of this dangerous amphibian inspired biologists to investigate newt toxicity. They eventually realized that newts were locked in a deadly battle with garter snakes. Wherever these rough-skinned newts lived alongside garter snakes, the local snakes would evolve over time. They would develop a resistance to tetrodotoxin, the same super-deadly poison that pufferfish are famous for. This led the newts to evolve to create even more of the toxin. A newt that could easily kill a garter snake from one side of the country might serve as a tasty snack for one on the other. The latest research suggests that the story started far earlier than the dead Oregonian hunters. It began long before newts even existed – around 170 million years ago. The study was published Thursday in the scientific journal Current Biology. Edmund "Butch" Brodie Jr.  was the scientist first inspired by the campfire tale. He and his son Edmund Brodie III identified what was going on in the deadly tug-of-war between newts and snakes. Tetrodotoxin (TTX) works by blocking proteins that let sodium atoms go through cells, which allows the cells to function. These proteins are called sodium channels. A blocked sodium channel quickly paralyzes an animal and kills it. Some garter snakes have developed a genetic mutation, or change, that lets them resist TTX. This mutation changes shape of their sodium channels to keep TTX from doing its job. The Brodies found that these snakes had mutations in three of their sodium channels – two in their nerve cells and one in their muscle cells. Snakes with these different muscle channels had the strongest resistance. The Brodies wanted to understand how this mutation came about. They discovered that the first mutation occurred about 170 million years old, older than snakes themselves. Some ancestral lizard-thing must have developed this trait, according to study author and Virginia Tech researcher Joel McGlothlin.  McGlothlin, the Brodies and other researchers looked at the genes behind these three sodium channels in 82 species – 78 snakes, two lizards, one bird and one turtle. Genes contain the instructions for how each part of the body works and are passed on from parents to children. Then the researchers looked into how these animals evolved. They determined that the first mutation in snakes appeared about 40 million years ago, right around the time that newts evolved. The most extreme snake mutation only came about around 12 million years ago. Only five species of snakes have it. It's not hard to see how this battle began: Snakes evolved already resistant to TTX. Newts with only a small amount of TTX were easy prey for them. Because of this, tiny newts evolved to carry toxins strong enough to kill three grown men at once.  Evolutionary change is the process by which living things adapt over many, many years. It can be a dangerous business, especially when two families are at war. The researchers hope that the study can be used to help scientists understand how other animals evolved. "One of the general take-home messages of this is that evolution that happens now is building upon millions of years of evolutionary history," McGlothlin said. "Certain pathways that evolution might go down are closed off because the right things didn't happen in the past. And other pathways are open because the right things did happen."