New tortoise species for Galapagos The baby tortoises wait for the sun to go down to leave their shelter. They are crowded under a rock in the Galapagos archipelago, a series of Ecuadorian islands in the Pacific Ocean. Nothing disturbs these eastern Santa Cruz tortoises, scientific name: Chelondis donfaustoi. Just two years ago, through genetic testing, they were determined to be a new species native to the islands that inspired Charles Darwin, the father of the theory of evolution. They are kept safe on Santa Cruz island where they are raised in a nursery. The nursery is one of three centers in the archipelago's national park where 12 species of giant tortoises, unique in the world, are bred. They stretch their necks and poke their heads out of tiny shells to nibble on a diet of leaves. The leaves are from tropical plants brought in from the South American continent 1,000 kilometers (600 miles) away. In the afternoon, they sleep while digesting. How much the tortoises eat is an important decision at the nursery. "We let them stay a little hungry. That way, when they return to the wild they go looking for their food," the director of the national park, Walter Bustos, told reporters. It's not yet time to let the tortoises go free. For that, their shells have to be 23 to 25 centimeters (nine to 10 inches) long, meaning around 4 or 5 years of age. That's not that much time for these reptiles that can live up to a century and a half. They can grow up to 2 meters, or more than 6 feet long, and weigh up to 450 kilograms, or 1,000 pounds. Several broods, or sets, of eggs hatched months earlier in the nursery. In all, the park now has 120 of the eastern Santa Cruz tortoises born in captivity, not in the wild. They join the better-known Galapagos giant tortoise (Chelonoidis nigra) on this string of volcanic islands. Giant tortoises arrived in the Galapagos around 3 or 4 million years ago. It appears ocean currents likely scattered them across the islands. They developed into 15 species, of which three are extinct, each adapting to its territory. The tortoise population was nearly destroyed by pirates and whale-hunters. They captured them for their meat and introduced invasive, or non-native, species such as dogs, goats and rats.  The tortoises' fat can also be transformed into oil. For a long time, tortoise oil fueled street lamps in Ecuador's capital, Quito, and the coastal city of Guayaquil. "The tortoises are sorts of engineers in the ecosystem," Washington Tapia, a biologist at the U.S.-based Galapagos Conservancy, said. "Through their movements they shape their environment, creating spaces where other species can develop." Santa Cruz island is the second biggest in the Galapagos. Up until 2002, the scientific community believed all the tortoises on Santa Cruz came from the same species, Chelonoidis porteri. However, after years of genetic studies, it was discovered in 2015 that those on the eastern part of the island, on Cerro Fatal (Deadly Hill), were a different species: Chelonoidis donfaustoi. There are fewer than 400 of this distinct species. The threat of predators caused park authorities to collect their eggs to hatch them and raise the babies in protective captivity to ensure their survival. Once mature, the plan is to release them in the same spot where their original nests were found. Not far from Cerro Fatal, park rangers make their regular patrols to check on adult donfaustoi tortoises. On one such patrol, they find a 100-kilogram  (220 pounds) tortoise in some shrubs beside a path. With no protest, the big reptile allows the rangers to measure its shell and check its health. Danny Rueda is ecosystem director of the park. He explained the differences between the tortoises as he inspected the animal's feet. "They have genetic and morphological characteristics that set them apart. The donfaustoi is smaller, with a domed shell, while the porteri is more rounded," he said.  Morphology is crucial to the evolutionary process. It is the process by which a species adapts to its surroundings, or environment, and those adaptations are reflected in the species' genetic material. The new species was named in honor of Fausto Llerena, the caretaker of "Lonesome George." George was the last Pinta Island tortoise who died on a nearby isle three years ago. DNA testing has shown the donfaustoi species to be very close genetically to the species of Lonesome George. A little farther along the path, two gigantic male donfaustoi tortoises could be seen battling for territory. They use their sturdy shells to butt each other until the defeated one slowly retreats under the trees.