New tortoise species for Galapagos The Galapagos Islands is an archipelago in the Pacific Ocean. An archipelago is a group of islands, like Hawaii. Many types of tortoises live on the Galapagos. One type is the Santa Cruz tortoise. Just two years ago, scientists made a discovery about the Santa Cruz tortoise. They found out that it was its own species. A species is a type of animal. Different species may look a lot alike, but they have important differences. The tortoises are kept in a safe place on Santa Cruz island. They are inside a nursery in a national park. The park breeds 12 species of giant tortoises. The tortoises stay there as babies. Then, when the tortoises are old enough, they go back into the wild. It's important that they are big enough to survive. These tortoises can live up to 150 years old. They are big, too. These reptiles can grow to be 6 feet long. They can weigh up to 1,000 pounds.  Giant tortoises arrived in the Galapagos around 3 or 4 million years ago. They were scattered across the islands. They developed into 15 different species. Of those 15, three no longer exist. Early on, tortoises were in danger. They were captured for their meat. People also brought non-native animals to their habitats.  Washington Tapia is a scientist on the island. He calls the tortoises engineers. That is because they shape their environment, he said. Santa Cruz island is the second biggest in the Galapagos. Up until 2002, scientists thought all the tortoises on the island were the same. However, a different species was discovered on the eastern part of the island: Chelonoidis donfaustoi. There are fewer than 400 Chelonoidis donfaustoi tortoises. Park authorities work to protect them. They collected their eggs and raise them in a safe place.  The new species was named in honor of Fausto Llerena. Fausto was the caretaker of "Lonesome George." George was the last Pinta Island tortoise. He died on the nearby island three years ago. The donfaustoi species is very closely related to the species of Lonesome George.