New tortoise species for Galapagos Crowded under a rock in the Galapagos archipelago, the baby tortoises wait for the sun to go down to leave their shelter. Nothing disturbs these eastern Santa Cruz tortoises, whose scientific name is Chelondis donfaustoi. Just two years ago, through genetic testing, they were determined to be a new species native to the Ecuadoran islands that inspired Charles Darwin. They are kept safe on Santa Cruz island and raised in captivity in a nursery. The nursery is one of three centers in the archipelago's national park where 12 species of giant tortoises, unique in the world, are bred. Stretching their necks and poking their heads out of tiny shells, they nibble on nutritious, starchy leaves of tropical plants brought in from the continent 1,000 kilometers (600 miles) away. In the afternoon, they sleep while digesting. ## No Overeaters Here How much the tortoises eat is an important decision at the nursery. "We let them stay a little hungry. That way, when they return to the wild they go looking for their food," the director of the national park, Walter Bustos, told news reporters. It's not yet time to let the tortoises go free. For that, their shells have to be 23 to 25 centimeters (9 to 10 inches) long, meaning around 4 or 5 years of age. That's an insignificant amount of time for these reptiles that can live up to a century and a half, reaching up to 2 meters (more than 6 feet) long and weighing up to 450 kilograms (1,000 pounds). Several broods of eggs hatched months earlier at the nursery. In all, the park now has 120 of the eastern Santa Cruz tortoises born in captivity, joining the better-known Galapagos giant tortoise (Chelonoidis nigra) on this string of volcanic islands in the Pacific Ocean. Giant tortoises arrived in the Galapagos around 3 or 4 million years ago, and it appears ocean currents likely scattered them across the islands. They developed into 15 species, of which three are extinct, each adapting to its territory. ## Tortoise Population Threatened The tortoise population was nearly destroyed by pirates and whale-hunters. They captured them for their meat and introduced invasive species such as dogs, goats and rats. The tortoises' fat can also be transformed into oil, and for a long time, it fueled street lamps in Ecuador's capital, Quito, and the coastal city of Guayaquil. "The tortoises are sort of engineers in the ecosystem," Washington Tapia, a biologist at the U.S.-based Galapagos Conservancy, said. "Through their movements they shape their environment, creating spaces where other species can develop." Up until 2002, the scientific community believed all the tortoises on Santa Cruz Island, the second biggest in the Galapagos, came from the same species, Chelonoidis porteri. However, after years of genetic studies, it was discovered in 2015 that those on the eastern part of the island, on Cerro Fatal (Deadly Hill), were a different species: Chelonoidis donfaustoi. ## Babies' Survival Chances Improved There are fewer than 400 of this distinct species. The threat of predators prompted park authorities to collect their eggs to hatch them and raise the babies in protective captivity to ensure their survival. Once mature, the plan is to release them in the same spot where their original nests were found. Not far from Cerro Fatal, an hour from the main town of Puerto Ayora, park rangers check on adult donfaustoi tortoises as they make their regular patrols. On one such patrol, they find a 100-kilogram, or 220-pound, tortoise in some shrubs beside a path. With no protest, the big reptile allows the rangers to measure its shell and check its health. ## How Tortoises Differ Danny Rueda, ecosystem director of the park, explained the differences between the tortoises as he inspected the animal's feet ."They have genetic and morphological characteristics that set them apart. The donfaustoi is smaller, with a domed shell, while the porteri is more rounded," he said.  The new species was named in honor of Fausto Llerena, the caretaker of "Lonesome George," the last of the Pinta Island tortoises. George died on a nearby isle three years ago, and DNA testing has shown the donfaustoi species to be very close genetically to the species of Lonesome George. A little farther along the path, two gigantic male donfaustoi tortoises could be seen battling for territory. They use their sturdy shells to butt each other until the defeated one slowly retreats under the trees.