New tortoise species for Galapagos The baby tortoises live on the Galapagos Islands, a series of islands in the Pacific Ocean near the country of Ecuador. They wait for the sun to go down to leave their shelter.  Nothing disturbs these eastern Santa Cruz tortoises with the scientific name: Chelondis donfaustoi. Just two years ago, they were determined to be a new species native to the islands that inspired Charles Darwin. Darwin is the father of the theory of evolution. He came upon the Galapagos Islands in 1835, where he studied the differences in species from island to island.  The tortoises are kept safe in a nursery on Santa Cruz island. The nursery is one of three centers in the archipelago's national park. The park breeds 12 species of giant tortoises. How much the tortoises eat is an important decision at the nursery. "We let them stay a little hungry. That way, when they return to the wild they go looking for their food," the director of the national park, Walter Bustos, told news reporters. The tortoises are released into the wild when they are 4 or 5 years old. That's when their shells are 9 to 10 inches long. These reptiles can live up to a century and a half. They can grow to be 6 feet long and weigh up to 1,000 pounds. In all, the park now has 120 of the eastern Santa Cruz tortoises born in the nurseries. Giant tortoises arrived in the Galapagos around 3 or 4 million years ago. It appears ocean currents, patterns of movement in the ocean, likely scattered them across the islands. They developed into 15 different species or types. Of those 15, three are extinct. The tortoise population was nearly destroyed by pirates and whale-hunters. They captured them for their meat. They also introduced invasive, or non-native, animals such as dogs, goats and rats.  The tortoises' fat can also be transformed into oil. For a long time, it fueled street lamps in two Ecuadorian cities. Washington Tapia is a biologist at the U.S.-based Galapagos Conservancy. He calls the tortoises engineers. "Through their movements they shape their environment, creating spaces where other species can develop," he said. Santa Cruz island is the second biggest in the Galapagos. Up until 2002, the scientific community believed all the tortoises on Santa Cruz came from the same species, Chelonoidis porteri. However, after years of genetic studies, a different species was discovered on the eastern part of the island: Chelonoidis donfaustoi. There are fewer than 400 tortoises of this distinct species. The threat of predators caused park authorities to protect them. They collected their eggs and raised them in captivity. Once mature, the plan is to release them in the same spot where their original nests were found. Park rangers make their regular patrols to check on adult donfaustoi tortoises. On one such patrol, they find a 220-pound tortoise. With no protest, the big reptile allows the rangers to measure its shell and check its health. Danny Rueda is ecosystem director of the park. He explained the differences between the tortoises as he inspected the animal's feet."The donfaustoi is smaller, with a domed shell, while the porteri is more rounded," he said. These differences come from different genes. The new species was named in honor of Fausto Llerena. Fausto was the caretaker of "Lonesome George." George was the last Pinta Island tortoise who died on the nearby island three years ago. DNA testing has shown the donfaustoi species to be very closely related to the species of Lonesome George.