Mimic octopus has been mimicked Octopuses are better at camouflage than any other animals. The best of these morphing creatures is the mimic octopus. It adopts the colors of a poisonous sea snake and changes its body into a thin ribbon to scare predators away.  Divers have seen mimic octopuses look like lion fish, sea stars, shrimp and anemones. When hungry, the octopus takes the form of a crab. Crabs fooled by the display end up eaten. Scientists and engineers also have fallen under the octopuses' spell. A team of Cornell University researchers successfully copied the mimic using sheets of rubber and mesh. The researchers got help from octopus expert Roger Hanlon. As they report in a study published Thursday in the journal Science, the researchers created a thin membrane that changes into complex 3-D shapes. It is much like the shape-shifting skin of an octopus. The membranes can blow up in seconds to the shapes of everyday objects, such as plants or stones. Octopuses are covered in papillae, Hanlon and other scientists documented in the Journal of Morphology in 2014\. The papillae go slack when an octopus wants to decrease the drag of water against skin, allowing it to speed away in a hurry. Contractions cause fleshy nubs to appear, and the skin bulges. Octopuses can match the look of seaweed so closely that they become almost invisible. ## Octopuses Can Become Almost Invisible Itai Cohen, a materials expert at Cornell and an author of the new study, said he was awed by videos of the shape-shifters. Such a scene was filmed by Hanlon and posted online. It is described as the Woods Hole Marine Biological Laboratory scientist's "most famous underwater video clip." People can stare at a coral reef and have no idea an octopus is there, Cohen said. Then, "It changes color. It changes texture. It appears out of nowhere." Cohen was impressed and inspired. "That is just awesome," he thought, wondering, "How the heck do we do that?" He and fellow Cornell researcher Robert Shepherd assigned James Pikul the work of figuring it out. Pikul was a student studying to become a professor and now is an assistant professor at the University of Pennsylvania. "For a few decades, scientists and engineers have been trying to control the shape of soft, stretchable materials," said Pikul. However, cheaply making these materials proved difficult. Success brought together the two concepts of the body of the octopus with the mechanics of blowing up a balloon. The trick was to cut rings into a thin surface of rubber and mesh. Filling the rubber with air caused the membrane to change following the shape of the cuts. ## Disguised As Stones And Plants The width of the rings determines how much stretch there is in the membrane, Pikul said. The wider the rings, the less stretch it had.  Programming the laser cuts enabled the rubber to blow up not only outwardly, like a kickball, but as a 3-D structure with smaller spots. It's a bit like the sculptures made by twisting together sausage-shaped balloons. In this case, however, it's all one piece. To show their membrane in action, the researchers had it take the shape of river stones. During demonstrations of their work, Shepherd begins with the membrane tucked among real stones. "Many times people are surprised that they weren't actually rocks," he said. The team also picked a plant with spiral leaves, Graptoveriaamethorum, to show that the membrane can mimic lifelike shapes. They are pretty cool plants, Pikul said. ## Borrowing Ideas From Octopuses Theirs is the latest invention in the field of soft materials to borrow ideas from octopuses. Researchers at Harvard University announced in August 2016 that they'd created a soft robot, patterned after octopuses. "I have been thinking about octopuses for a while," Shepherd said. In previous research, he and other scientists created color-changing robots also inspired by octopus skin. The Army Research Office provided funding for the recent work. "You could imagine shipping out camouflage sheets," Cohen said. Once delivered to the field, a sheet might hide a location from the enemy. They didn't go into this study with a specific use in mind, Shepherd said. However, he expects to see other uses come from the results.