Staff believe the common New Zealand octopus fled its enclosure when the lid was left ajar and headed to freedom down a pipe that leads to the sea. Not long ago an octopus boldly escaped from the National Aquarium in New Zealand. He broke out of his tank and slithered down a long drainpipe. Then the octopus disappeared into sea.   The sneaky escape could have come from the movie "Finding Nemo." The common New Zealand octopus was named Inky. The lid of his tank was left slightly open by accident and he made his dash for freedom. Aquarium workers believe that he escaped in the middle of the night. The aquarium was empty. Inky climbed to the top of his glass tank. He then slid down the side of the tank and traveled across the floor of the aquarium. “Octopuses are famous escape artists. But Inky really tested the waters here," said Rob Yarrell, who is head of the National Aquarium of New Zealand. "I don’t think he was unhappy with us, or lonely, as octopus are solitary creatures. But he is such a curious boy. He would want to know what’s happening on the outside. That’s just his personality.” Some people believe Inky slid across the aquarium floor. He traveled about 10 or 12 feet. Then Inky found his way into a drainpipe that opened directly into the sea. There was another possible escape route. Inky could have squeezed into an open pipe at the top of his tank. That pipe led under the floor to the drain. “When we came in the next morning and his tank was empty, I was really surprised,” Yarrell said. He has not launched a search for Inky. “The staff and I have been pretty sad. But then, this is Inky, and he’s always been a bit of a surprise octopus.” Reiss Jenkinson is in charge of exhibits at the National Aquarium. He said he was almost certain that Inky was not “taken” or “stolen.”  Jenkinson understands how octopuses behave. “I have seen octopus on boats slip through bilge pumps," Jenkinson said. The aquarium is watched closely. So, it would have been hard for "anyone to take Inky, and why would they?" he added.  Octopuses have no bones so they are able to fit into very small spaces. They have been filmed squeezing through openings the size of coins. They are also very smart and can even use tools. The Island Bay marine education center is in Wellington, New Zealand. One of its octopuses visited another tank to steal crabs. The octopus would then return to its own tank. A local fisherman brought Inky to the National Aquarium a number of years ago. He found Inky caught in a crayfish pot. Inky was scarred and “rough looking,” Yarrell said. “He had been living on the reef and fighting with fish so he wasn’t in the best shape.” Inky is about the size of a football. Yarrell said he was an "unusually" smart octopus. “He was very friendly ... and a popular attraction here. We have another octopus, Blotchy, but he is smaller than Inky, and Inky had the personality.”  The aquarium does not plan to hire more security. However, the escape made workers now realize "what octopuses can actually do.” The aquarium has not been searching for a replacement. Still, if a fisherman brought in another octopus it might be willing to take it on.  “You never know,” Yarrell said. “There’s always a chance Inky could come home to us.”