Mimic octopus has been mimicked Octopuses can change their shape and color. They do it so they can look like other animals.  They want to fool other animals so they can eat them. Sometimes they trick them just to scare them away, though.  One kind of octopus is the mimic octopus. It is the best at changing how it looks. It can make itself look like a sea snake to scare animals away.  People have seen the octopuses look like sea stars and other animals. When it is hungry, the octopus takes the form of a crab. Real crabs can get tricked. They can end up getting eaten. ## Trying To Copy Octopuses A team of scientists copied the mimic octopus. They used sheets of rubber and mesh. The scientists got help from octopus expert Roger Hanlon. They wrote about their study. The scientists created a thin membrane, like skin, that changes into shapes. It is like the skin of an octopus. The membranes can blow up to the shapes of everyday things. They can look like plants or stones. Itai Cohen was a writer on the new study. He said he was amazed by videos of the shape-changers. Such a scene was filmed by Hanlon and put online.  People can stare at an underwater scene and have no idea an octopus is there, Cohen said. Then it changes color and shape. "It appears out of nowhere," he said. Cohen liked it and wanted to try it. "That is just awesome," he thought. "How the heck do we do that?" ## Soft, Stretchy Things That Change Shape He and scientist Robert Shepherd gave James Pikul the work of figuring it out. Pikul was a student at the time of this study. Now he is a professor. Scientists have been trying to make soft, stretchy things into shapes, said Pikul. It has been hard to do, though. It costs too much.  They found a way to do it. They used the idea of blowing up a balloon. The trick was to cut rings into a thin sheet of rubber. Filling the rubber with air caused the membrane to change following the shape of the cuts. The scientists showed their membrane working. They had it take the shape of stones. Shepherd shows the membrane tucked among real stones. Many times people are surprised that they were not really rocks, he said. The team also copied a plant with unusual leaves. They showed that the membrane can copy lifelike shapes.