Mimic octopus has been mimicked Octopuses are better at camouflage than any other animals. They can change their shape and color to look like other creatures. The best of these morphing creatures is the mimic octopus. It adopts the colors of a poisonous sea snake and changes its body into a thin ribbon to scare predators away. People have seen mimic octopuses look like lion fish, sea stars and other animals. When hungry, the octopus takes the form of a crab. Crabs fooled by the display end up eaten. Scientists and engineers are impressed by the octopuses. A team of Cornell University scientists copied the mimic using sheets of rubber and mesh. The scientists got help from octopus expert Roger Hanlon. As they report in a study published Thursday in the journal Science, they created a thin membrane, like skin, that changes into 3-D shapes. It is like the shape-changing skin of an octopus. The membranes can blow up in seconds to the shapes of everyday objects. They can look like plants or stones. ## The Power To Appear And Disappear Octopuses are covered in papillae, Hanlon and other scientists said in the Journal of Morphology in 2014\. The papillae are what help an octopus use camouflage. The papillae go limp when an octopus wants to decrease the drag of water against skin, allowing it to speed away. Then fleshy nubs can appear, and the skin bulges. Octopuses can match the look of seaweed so closely that they become almost invisible. Itai Cohen, a writer of the new study, said he was amazed by videos of the shape-changers. Such a scene was filmed by Hanlon and posted online.  People can stare at an underwater scene and have no idea an octopus is there, Cohen said. Then it changes color and shape. "It appears out of nowhere," he said. Cohen was impressed. "That is just awesome," he thought. "How the heck do we do that?" He and fellow Cornell scientist Robert Shepherd gave James Pikul the work of figuring it out. Pikul was studying to be a professor at the time. Today he is a professor at the University of Pennsylvania. "Scientists and engineers have been trying to control the shape of soft, stretchable materials," said Pikul. However, cheaply making these materials has been difficult. ## Membrane Can Copy Different Shapes Success came with the idea of blowing up a balloon. The trick was to cut rings into a thin surface of rubber. Filling the rubber with air caused the membrane to change following the shape of the cuts. The width of the rings determines how much stretch there is in the membrane, Pikul said. The wider the rings, the less stretch it had.  To show their membrane in action, the scientists had it take the shape of river stones. While showing their work, Shepherd begins with the membrane tucked among real stones. "Many times people are surprised that they weren't actually rocks," he said. The team also picked a plant with unusual leaves, Graptoveriaamethorum, to show that the membrane can copy lifelike shapes. They are pretty cool plants, Pikul said. ## Lots Of Good Ideas Come From Octopuses Theirs is the latest invention in the field of soft materials to borrow ideas from octopuses. Scientists at Harvard University announced in August 2016 that they had created a soft robot. It was patterned after octopuses. "I have been thinking about octopuses for a while," Shepherd said. In previous studies, he and other scientists created color-changing robots also similar to octopus skin. The Army Research Office provided money for the recent work. "You could imagine shipping out camouflage sheets," Cohen said. Once delivered to the field, a sheet might hide a location from the enemy. They didn't go into this study with a specific use in mind, Shepherd said. However, he expects to see other uses come from the results.