Staff believe the common New Zealand octopus fled its enclosure when the lid was left ajar and headed to freedom down a pipe that leads to the sea. An octopus has made a bold escape from a National Aquarium in New Zealand by breaking out of its tank, and slithering down a 50-meter (about 54 yards) drainpipe. After negotiating the drainpipe, the stealth creature disappeared into sea.  The escape scenes could have come straight out of "Finding Nemo." Inky, a common New Zealand octopus, made his dash for freedom after the lid of his tank was accidentally left slightly ajar. Staff believe that in the middle of the night, while the aquarium was deserted, Inky clambered to the top of his glass tank, or enclosure. He then slid down the side of the tank and traveled across the floor of the aquarium. “Octopuses are famous escape artists. But Inky really tested the waters here," said Rob Yarrell, national manager of the National Aquarium of New Zealand in Napier. "I don’t think he was unhappy with us, or lonely, as octopus are solitary creatures. But he is such a curious boy. He would want to know what’s happening on the outside. That’s just his personality.” One theory is that Inky slid across the aquarium floor – a journey of about 10 or 12 feet. Then, sensing freedom was at hand, Inky found his way into a drainpipe that leads directly to the sea. The drainpipe was 50 meters long, and opened on to Hawke’s Bay, on the east coast of New Zealand’s North Island. There was another possible escape route Inky could have taken. That scenario could have involved Inky squeezing into an open pipe at the top of his tank, which led under the floor to the drain. “When we came in the next morning and his tank was empty, I was really surprised,” said Yarrell, who has not launched a search for Inky. “The staff and I have been pretty sad. But then, this is Inky, and he’s always been a bit of a surprise octopus.” Reiss Jenkinson, exhibits keeper at the National Aquarium, said he was absolutely certain Inky was not “stolen.”  “I understand the nature of octopus behavior very well,” he said. “I have seen octopus on boats slip through bilge pumps. And the security here is too tight for anyone to take Inky, and why would they?” Because octopuses have no bones they are able to fit into extremely small spaces, and have been filmed squeezing through gaps the size of coins. They are also understood to be extremely intelligent and capable of using tools. The Island Bay marine education centre in Wellington holds one of the largest collections of local marine life in New Zealand. One of its resident octopus was found to be in the habit of visiting another tank overnight to steal crabs. The octopus would then return to its own tank. Another octopus at the centre, Ozymandias, was thought to have broken a world record for opening a jar to get at the tasty snacks inside in only 54 seconds. The speedy octopus was released into the ocean sometime later. Inky was brought to the National Aquarium a number of years ago by a local fisherman who had found him caught in a crayfish pot. Yarrell said Inky was scarred and “rough looking,” with shortened limbs. “He had been living on the reef and fighting with fish so he wasn’t in the best shape.” According to Yarrell, Inky – who is about the size of a soccer ball – was an “unusually intelligent” octopus. “He was very friendly, very inquisitive, and a popular attraction here. We have another octopus, Blotchy, but he is smaller than Inky, and Inky had the personality.” The aquarium has no plans to step up security as a result of the escape as Inky was “one out of the bag.” However, the staff were “increasingly aware of what octopuses can actually do.” Although the aquarium is not actively searching for a replacement for Inky, if a fisherman brought in another octopus it might be willing to take it on. And they have not given up hope on the Houdini of octopuses just yet.  “You never know,” Yarrell said. “There’s always a chance Inky could come home to us.”