The truth is not nearly as simple as activists and SeaWorld claim. Scientists aren't sure how long killer whales live. ORLANDO, Fla. — Killer whales, or orcas, can live as long as humans when left in the ocean. But killer whales in SeaWorld parks die early. At least, this is what an activist claims in the movie “Blackfish.” The movie takes a harsh look at SeaWorld’s killer whale program. No one in the movie says that the activist might be wrong. The bit of information is used to convince the audience that the giant whales suffer when forced to live in man-made pools. But SeaWorld says its killer whales live as long as wild ones. The company says it provides a healthy and interesting home for the 29 orcas it owns. Its captive collection is the largest in the world. The truth is not nearly as simple as either side claims. The fact is that scientists don’t know for sure how long killer whales live. "Blackfish" is a serious challenge to SeaWorld. Both sides are using numbers to make their case. Some experts accuse both sides of only choosing numbers that help their side. That, they say, has muddied what should be an honest debate. “Both sides skew the numbers,” said John Hargrove, a former SeaWorld killer whale trainer. He said he wants to see an end to orcas in marine parks. But he also disagrees with some of the views of animal rights groups. “This is a debate, but you have to debate with facts,” added Hargrove. He appears on screen in “Blackfish.” Scientists have studied only very few of the world’s wild killer whales. That is one of the largest problems for understanding how long orcas live. Only a handful of populations in the northeastern Pacific Ocean have been observed by scientists long enough to reach solid information about them. Killer whales are found around the globe, from Iceland to Sri Lanka to Antarctica. There are at least nine genetically separate “ecotypes,” said Brad Hanson. He is a Seattle scientist with the National Marine Fisheries Service. In other words, salmon-eating orcas in the Pacific Northwest might have one lifespan. But mammal-eating orcas in the Antarctic Ocean, also called the Southern Ocean, might have another. Scientists studied groups of killer whales in the Pacific Northwest. They found females can live from 30 to 50 years. Male orcas lived from 19 to 31 years. But the numbers can change depending on which group was studied and during what period. Some whales can live much longer. Scientists think the oldest a female orca can get is 90 years. They think males can live up to 70 years. Most of SeaWorld’s whales are much younger. Only one has so far lived into her 40s. But there isn't much information out there. Scientists say it can be wrong to compare how long whales live in the wild to how long they live in parks. They say the better comparison to use is the “annual survival rate.” That is an estimate of how many whales in a population can be expected to live through the year. Craig Matkin led a recent study of wild killer whales. He surveyed a population of orcas off the southern Alaskan coast. They had annual survival rates of 97 to 99 out of 100, depending on their age. The best known study comparing annual survival rates was published in 1995. The study found an annual survival rate of 93 out of every 100 for captive orcas. That’s a big difference. Put another way: Captive whales were dying three times as fast as wild whales were dying. That study is still used today by animal rights groups and other activists. It’s one of the studies the makers of “Blackfish" used while making the movie. But newer studies seem to show that captive whales are doing better. A team of scientists gave a presentation last month in New Zealand. They said that the annual survival rate for captive whales had improved to about 98 out of 100 in the past 10 years. This was based on numbers from up to November 2013. Of course, most of SeaWorld’s killer whales are younger. They haven’t yet lived long enough to know for sure whether they will match the lives of whales in the wild.