An activist in the movie says orcas live longer in the wild. The marine park says that isn't so. ORLANDO, Fla. — Killer whales, also called orcas, can live as long as humans. But that's if they're left in the ocean. Killer whales in SeaWorld parks die early. At least, this is what an activist claims. The activist says this in the middle of “Blackfish.” "Blackfish" is a movie about SeaWorld’s killer whale program. No one in the movie says that the activist might be wrong. The movie says living in SeaWorld parks is bad for whales. The bit of information about how long they live is supposed to convince the audience. But SeaWorld says its killer whales live as long as wild ones. It owns 29 orcas. The company says it provides a healthy and interesting home for the whales. Its collection is the largest in the world. The truth is not nearly as simple as either side says it is. The fact is that scientists don’t know for sure how long killer whales live. Both SeaWorld and activists are using numbers to make their case. Some experts accuse both sides of bending the truth. “Both sides skew the numbers,” said John Hargrove. He used to be a SeaWorld killer whale trainer. He said he wants to see an end to orcas in marine parks. But he also doesn't agree with the views of some animal rights groups. “This is a debate, but you have to debate with facts,” added Hargrove. He appears on screen in “Blackfish.” Scientists haven't studied very many wild killer whales. That is one of the biggest problems for understanding how long they live. Killer whales are found around the globe. They can live from Iceland to Sri Lanka to Antarctica. There are at least nine different “ecotypes,” said Brad Hanson. He is a Seattle scientist with the National Marine Fisheries Service. In other words, salmon-eating orcas in the Pacific Northwest might have one lifespan. But mammal-eating orcas in the Antarctic Ocean, also called the Southern Ocean, might have another. Scientists studied groups of killer whales in the Pacific Northwest. They found females can live from 30 to 50 years. Male orcas lived from 19 to 31 years. Some whales can live much longer. Scientists think the oldest a female orca can get is 90 years. They think males can live up to 70 years. Most of SeaWorld’s whales are much younger. Only one has so far lived into her 40s. But scientists say there isn't enough information. It's too hard to compare how long whales live in the wild to how long they live in parks. They say the better tool to use is the “annual survival rate.” It tells how many whales in a group can be expected to live through the year. One recent study used this number to find out how orcas were doing. It watched a group of orcas off the southern Alaskan coast. They had annual survival rates where 97 to 99 out of every 100 survived each year. A famous study from 1995 looked at this rate. It compared how long captive and wild orcas lived. The study found that only 93 out of 100 captive orcas would live through the year. That’s a big difference. The numbers showed that captive orcas were dying three times as fast as wild ones. That study is still used today. Animal rights groups and other activists use it to argue for freeing the killer whales. It’s one of the studies the makers of “Blackfish" used while making the movie. But newer studies make it seem that captive whales are doing better. Last month, scientists presented a new study. They said that the annual survival rate for captive whales had improved. Now it was about 98 out of 100 over the past 10 years. This was based on numbers up to November 2013. But, most of SeaWorld’s killer whales are young. They haven’t yet lived long enough to know for sure whether they will match the lives of whales in the wild.