Bacteria and fungi on surface of seawater may pose risk to Puget Sound orca population SEATTLE, Wash. — Scientists studying the breath of orca whales discovered that they spray bacteria and other germs. The whales are already endangered. Now, scientists are worried the germs might make them sick.  In the orca's breath samples, scientists found germs that may be harmful. According to a study, some of the germs resisted medicine used by people and animals. This means they probably came from human waste that got into the water. The germs are used to medicine, and which makes them able to survive.  Scientists studying the whales had to get creative to get breath samples. The team followed the whales on boats as they swam in Washington state waters. They waited for the whales to surface and breathe. Then, they would swing a 25-foot long pole with several petri dishes above an orca's blowhole. The gel in the dishes caught the droplets that sprayed out. The scientists collected these samples for four years. They identified many different bacteria and fungi in the whales' breath.  Scientists also found healthy bacteria in the breath samples. They are worried, though, about the drug-resistant ones. That's because they could make the whales very sick.  The Puget Sound orcas have been struggling to keep up their numbers. They face threats from lack of prey, pollution and noise from vessels. The orcas were listed as endangered in 2005\. Now, there are only 78. The whales swim through waterways that cross cities. The waterways are full of human-made waste which is bad for the environment. This includes everything from what gets flushed down toilets to chemical runoff from farms.  Stephen Raverty is the paper's lead author. He studies diseases in animals with British Columbia Ministry of Agriculture's Animal Health Center in Canada. He says that the whales are encountering the bacteria in their own habitat.  Like humans, if the orcas do not have a strong immune system, they can get sick more easily. The immune system protects the body from foreign invaders like germs. According to Pete Shroeder, the whales face many problems that make their immune systems weaker. Shroeder is a scientist and co-author of the paper.  The study is the first to look at germs that cause diseases in killer whales. The results will help the scientists study changes in the whales' health over time.  Scientists collected 26 breath samples from whales around San Juan Island on the U.S. side of Puget Sound. They also took samples from the surface of the seawater. They found some of the same germs in the seawater.  Scientists do not know enough to say how harmful the germs are to the orcas.  "Because you find a potential pathogen, it doesn't mean the animal is necessarily sick. It might be something normal," said Linda Rhodes. She is a research scientists with the Northwest Fisheries Science Center in Seattle and co-author of the study. Scientists are creating personal health records for each endangered whale. The whales are carefully tracked and photographed. Each orca is identified by it unique black and white markings and fin shape. Then, each whale is given a number and a name.