Killer whales are puzzling scientists. Although they are protected in the waters, the Puget Sound population of the mammals is shrinking. Maybe there isn't enough food. In the last 10 years, scientists have figured out where orcas go in winter. They’ve learned that the killer whales can tell a Chinook salmon from a sockeye salmon. And they know how whales respond when they hear noise from boats. There has been a huge increase in knowledge. Yet, new research shows the Puget Sound [killer whale population is shrinking](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species). Scientists are “trying to understand ... why the whales haven’t increased more than they have,” said Mike Ford. He is with a government agency that studies oceans and the weather. It is called the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). In one sense, scientists already know. New whale discoveries show that orcas face complicated dangers. These dangers also tend to make each other worse. “Part of what I hoped at the beginning was that it would be mostly one thing that was wrong,” said Brad Hanson. He is a whale expert with NOAA. “But they all appear to be" tied together. In the early 1960s, there were 140 killer whales in Puget Sound near the Pacific Ocean. Some scientists suspect that a century before, there may have been 200 whales or more. But companies began catching orcas to sell to aquariums. By the early 1970s, the whale population had dropped to just 71. A few years later, catching whales became against the law. Twenty years later, the orca population climbed to 99. But as of last year, only 82 orcas remain. There are three main reasons behind the decreasing numbers. The whales don't have enough food. Chemicals from pollution are building up in their bodies. And they are disturbed by noise from boats. Also, whales mostly prefer Chinook salmon. But the number of Chinook is also falling. In addition, noise from boats disturbs the orcas. It causes them to swim faster and work harder. They also slap their tails more and hunt less. This may mean they use more energy just as they’re getting less food. New rules say boaters and whale-watching ships have to stay 200 yards from whales. But they don't always follow the new rules, said Lynne Barre. She is with NOAA’s Seattle office. Meanwhile, chemicals from pollution build up in their fat. This may affect their health. It also may limit the number of offspring. At the same time, other Northwest sea animals that eat fish actually are on the rise. These include seals and sea lions. It also includes other killer whale populations. The number of northern killer whales has tripled to nearly 300 since the 1960s. Northern and southern whales eat about the same thing. But Puget Sound’s southern whales range from California to Alaska. The northern whales travel mostly between northern Washington and Alaska. They may even be helping to keep the number of southern whales down. For starters, northern whales may be getting to the food first. “One thing we’re considering is that the northern-resident population may have first crack at the best salmon stocks,” Hanson said. “A lot of the West Coast fish, they come out of the rivers. They turn right and head north.” Other problems make life hard for southern whales. Two of the three southern whale groups don't have enough young females. They already give birth to fewer whale calves than northern whales. There are many other whale mysteries. Dead killer whales rarely wash up on the beach. If they did, researchers could find and study them, Barre said. Instead, the whales just disappear, and scientists never know why they died. Much of whale behavior can't be understood. “Why do they sometimes decide to turn out toward the ocean and stay there for two weeks?” Barre asked.