Bacteria and fungi on surface of seawater may pose risk to Puget Sound orca population SEATTLE, Wash. — The powerful orca whale breaks the surface of the water in order to exhale. When it does, scientists say, it sprays bacteria and fungi through its breath, some of it good and some of it bad.  The new findings raise concerns about contagious diseases adding to the stresses of the struggling population of endangered Puget Sound orcas. The orcas' breath samples revealed microbes capable of causing diseases. According to a study published last week in the journal Scientific Reports, some of the bacteria were resistant to multiple antibiotics frequently used in people and animals. This suggests that human waste is contaminating the marine environment. Scientists followed the whales as they swam in Washington state waters and waited for them to surface and exhale. The researchers on boats would swing a 25-foot long pole with several petri dishes above an orca's blowhole, capturing the droplets that sprayed out. The study captured unique breath samples over a four-year period. They identified a wide variety of bacteria and fungi contained in the exhaled breath of the small, distinct population of southern resident killer whales of the northeast Pacific Ocean. The number of Puget Sound orcas has fluctuated in recent decades as they have faced threats from lack of prey, pollution and noise disturbance from vessels. The orcas were listed as endangered in 2005, and now number 78. Scientists found healthy bacteria in the breath samples but also worrisome drug-resistant ones such as salmonella and Staphylococcus aureus. These bacteria could potentially make the orcas ill.  The whales swim through waterways crossing through cities and encounter a number of environmental stressors caused by humans. This includes everything from what gets flushed down toilets to agricultural runoff. "They're recruiting the bacteria in their habitats," said Stephen Raverty. He is the study's lead author and is also a veterinary pathologist with British Columbia Ministry of Agriculture's Animal Health Center in Canada. Orcas with weak immune responses can get sick more easily from the bacteria, resulting in respiratory diseases.  "These animals are subject to many stressors, which reduce the competence of their immune systems," said marine mammal veterinarian Pete Schroeder. He is a co-author of the paper. It is the first such study to provide a snapshot of the bacterial and viral burden of this endangered population. It will help scientists develop a baseline to compare changes to the whales' respiratory conditions over time. Scientists collected 26 breath samples from whales around San Juan Island on the U.S. side of Puget Sound and then compared them to seawater samples collected from surface of the water. When the whales break through the surface of the water, they take in the contaminants and other microorganisms in that sea layer. Disease-causing bacteria and viruses as well as antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains were found in both the breath samples and seawater. Scientists do not know enough to say how harmful the bacteria are to the orcas. "Because you find a potential pathogen, it doesn't mean the animal is necessarily sick. It might be something normal," said Linda Rhodes, supervisory research microbiologist with the Northwest Fisheries Science Center in Seattle and a co-author of the study. Bacteria are there, and if for any reason the animals have a weakened immune system, it could provide an opening to make the orcas sick, Raverty said. Scientists tracking the deaths of whales found that respiratory disease was a major factor. About 40 percent of them had some infection in the lung, and in some cases, it was strong enough to contribute to their deaths, Raverty said. The study pointed out that within 30 miles of the study area is the city of Victoria, British Columbia, which does not have a secondary sewage treatment facility. Instead, it discharges waste with only primary treatment into the sea. Scientists are working on creating personal health records for each endangered whale. The whales are intensely tracked and photographed. Individual Puget Sound orcas are identified by unique black and white markings or variations in their fin shapes, and each whale has a number and a name.