There are fewer killer whales than there should be in part of the Pacific Ocean. Scientists want to know if pollution is hurting them or if they don't get enough to eat. Scientists know a lot about killer whales. They know where the whales go in winter. They know that killer whales can tell one kind of salmon from another. They know what the whales do when they hear boat noises. Still, scientists don't know why there aren't more whales. Ten years ago, the U.S. government protected the killer whales in Puget Sound. Puget Sound is near the Pacific Ocean. The whales are also called orcas. They can't be hunted or caught. There should be more of them. Yet, [the number of whales is shrinking](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species). Scientists are “trying to understand ... why the whales haven’t increased more than they have,” said Mike Ford. He is a whale expert with the government. In one way, scientists already know. New discoveries show that orcas face many dangers. In the early 1960s, there were 140 killer whales in Puget Sound. There may have been 200 or more 100 years ago. Then companies began catching orcas. They sold the whales to sea parks, like Sea World. By the early 1970s, there were 71 whales. Catching them became against the law. The number of whales quickly grew to 99. As of last year, only 82 remain. There are three main reasons for the lower number of whales. First, there isn't enough food to go around. Second, chemicals from pollution are building up in their bodies. And third, they are disturbed by noise from boats. The noise causes them to swim faster. They slap their tails more and hunt less. They use more energy just as they’re getting less food. New rules say ships have to stay 600 feet from whales. However, the ships don't always follow the rules, said Lynne Barre. She is another government whale expert. There are many other whale mysteries. For some reason there aren't many young female whales. If scientists could study dead orcas, they might understand more. But they rarely find dead orcas. Instead, when the orcas die, they just disappear. Scientists never learn why they died. Scientists also don't understand much about whale behavior. Sometimes, whales swim out toward the ocean. Then they stay there for two weeks. "Why?" asked Barre.