The question is at the center of a debate on whether the U.S. should continue to permit killer whales to be exhibited in marine parks. ORLANDO, Fla. — Killer whales in SeaWorld parks die early while their counterparts in the wild live as long as humans. So claims an activist in the middle of “Blackfish,” the crusading documentary about SeaWorld’s killer whale program. The claim goes unchallenged in the film. It is meant to suggest that the giant marine mammals suffer when forced to live in man-made pools. Yet SeaWorld Entertainment Inc. says its killer whales have life spans similar to those of wild orcas. The company asserts this to show that it provides a healthy and stimulating environment for the 29 orcas it owns at four marine parks. Its captive collection is the largest on the planet. The truth is not nearly as simple as either side claims. The fact is that scientists don’t know for sure how long killer whales live. The marine park industry, which is led by SeaWorld, and the anti-captivity movement, which “Blackfish” has come to symbolize, are both using numbers to make their case. Some experts accuse both sides of cherry-picking research and manipulating the numbers. That, they say, has muddied what should be an honest debate about whether the U.S. should continue to allow killer whales to be exhibited in marine parks. “Both sides skew the numbers,” said John Hargrove, a former SeaWorld killer whale trainer. He said he wants to see an end to orcas in marine parks, but is also critical of what he calls the vocal “fringe” of animal rights groups. “This is a debate, but you have to debate with facts,” added Hargrove, who appears on screen in “Blackfish.” One of the biggest obstacles to understanding the whales’ life spans is that researchers have studied only a small percentage of the world’s wild killer whales. Just a handful of populations off the coasts of Washington state, British Columbia and Alaska have been under observation long enough to reach trustworthy conclusions. Killer whales are found around the globe, from Iceland to Sri Lanka to Antarctica. There are at least nine genetically distinct “ecotypes,” Brad Hanson, a Seattle scientist with the National Marine Fisheries Service, wrote in an email. It may be, for instance, that salmon-eating orcas in the Pacific Northwest have different life expectancies than mammal-eating orcas in the Antarctic Ocean, also called the Southern Ocean. Several peer-reviewed studies conducted by U.S. and Canadian government researchers have calculated average life expectancies for killer whales in the Pacific Northwest. The results range from 30 to 50 years for females and from 19 to 31 years for males. But the numbers can change depending on which specific population was studied and during what period. Individual whales can live much longer. The maximum lifespan has been estimated at up to 90 years for females and 70 years for males, depending on the study. Most of SeaWorld’s whales are far younger; only one has so far lived into her 40s. But with the limited information available, scientists say it can be misleading to compare life expectancies between whales in the wild and those in parks. Instead, they say, the more accurate comparison to use is the “annual survival rate.” That is, essentially, an estimate of the percentage of whales in a population expected to survive each year. One of the most recent studies of wild killer whales was led by Craig Matkin. He is the executive director of the North Gulf Oceanic Society in Alaska, which receives money from the government. That survey found that a population of orcas off the southern Alaskan coast had annual survival rates generally of 97 to 99 percent, depending on their age. The best known peer-reviewed study comparing annual survival rates between wild and captive killer whales was published in 1995. Using federal government records, the authors calculated an annual survival rate of a little more than 93 percent for captive orcas. That’s a substantial difference. Put another way: Captive whales were dying at a rate of more than 6 percent a year, close to three times the rate at which wild whales were dying. That study continues to be widely cited today by animal rights groups and other activists. It’s one of the studies the makers of “Blackfish” relied on while researching the film. But newer studies suggest that captive whales are doing better. At a conference last month in New Zealand, a research team that included Douglas DeMaster — one of the co-authors of the 1995 study — gave a presentation indicating that the annual survival rate for captive whales had improved to about 98 percent in the past decade. This was based on numbers from up to November 2013. The survival rate “for captive killer whales seems to be improving, although that is certainly not the only metric that we should be using,” DeMaster said in an email interview. He added that newer studies seem to show that captive-born whales, in particular, appear to be surviving at about the same rate as wild whales. SeaWorld, for its part, says its whales have survived at an annual rate of about 98 percent during the past decade and about 97 percent during the past two decades. The annual survival rate for killer whales held at SeaWorld facilities since the 1960s is substantially lower. But the company says using the more recent numbers better reflects improvements in care.