Bacteria and fungi on surface of seawater may pose risk to Puget Sound orca population SEATTLE, Wash. — Orca whales must return to the surface of the water in order to exhale. When they do, they breathe out bacteria and fungi. Some of the bacteria is good, but some of it is bad.  The bacteria in the whales' breath concerns scientists, who are worried about contagious diseases among the orcas. The orcas in Washington State's Puget Sound are already struggling to maintain their numbers.  The orcas' breath samples revealed  bacteria and viruses capable of causing diseases. According to a study published in the journal Scientific Reports last week, some of the bacteria were resistant to many antibiotics frequently used in humans and animals. This suggests that human waste is contaminating the marine environment.  In order to do this research, scientists had to get creative in their approach. For four years, a team followed the whales on boats as they swam in Washington state waters, waiting for the orcas to surface and exhale. Then, they would swing a 25-foot long pole with several petri dishes above an orca's blowhole. The gel in the dishes caught the droplets as they sprayed out. Using the samples, the scientists  identified a wide variety of bacteria and fungi in the whales' breath.  The number of Puget Sound orcas has changed in recent decades. They face threats from lack of prey, pollution and noise disturbance from vessels. The orcas were listed as endangered in 2005, and now number just 78. Scientists also found healthy bacteria in the breath samples. They are worried, though, about drug-resistant ones such as salmonella and Staphylococcus aureus, which can cause serious illnesses. The whales swim in waterways that cross through cities. The waterways are full of human-made waste which is contaminating the whales' habitat. This includes everything from what gets flushed down toilets to chemicals in agricultural runoff. "They're recruiting the bacteria in their habitats," said Stephen Raverty. He is the study's lead author. He studies diseases in animals at the British Columbia Ministry of Agriculture's Animal Health Center, which is located in Canada.  Orcas with weak immune systems can be made sick more easily by the bacteria. They can get respiratory diseases which harm their lungs.  "These animals are subject to many stressors, which reduce the competence of their immune systems," said marine mammal veterinarian Pete Schroeder. He is a co-author of the paper. It is the first study to look at the microorganisms that cause diseases in killer whales. It will help scientists develop a baseline understanding so they can follow changes in the whales' respiratory conditions over time. Scientists collected 26 breath samples from whales around San Juan Island on the U.S. side of Puget Sound. Then, they compared them to seawater samples from the surface of the water. When the whales break through the surface of the water, they may breathe the water in. Disease-causing bacteria and viruses were found in the breath samples as well as seawater.  Scientists do not know enough to say how harmful the bacteria are to the orcas. "Because you find a potential pathogen, it doesn't mean the animal is necessarily sick. It might be something normal," said Linda Rhodes. She is a research scientists with the Northwest Fisheries Science Center in Seattle and co-author of the study. Bacteria are there, though, and if for any reason the orcas have a weakened immune system, they could become sick, Raverty said. Scientists tracking the whales found that respiratory disease was a factor in their deaths. About 40 percent of the whales who died had some infection in the lung, he added.  The study said it is important to note that within 30 miles of the study area is the city of Victoria, British Columbia. The city does not have a secondary sewage treatment facility and instead releases waste with only primary treatment into the water. Scientists are working on creating personal health records for each endangered whale. The whales are intensely tracked and photographed. Individual Puget Sound orcas are identified by unique black and white markings or differences in their fin shapes, and each whale is given a number and a name.