The killer whales of Puget Sound have been a protected species for some time. There should be more of them, but scientists can't quite figure out what is limiting the orca population. It would be so much easier if the whales faced just one problem, but they don't. For many reasons, the number of killer whales, or orcas, is shrinking, not growing. About a decade ago, the killer whales of Puget Sound gained protection under the Endangered Species Act, meaning that they can't be hunted. Since then, scientists have figured out where the orcas go in winter. They’ve learned that the whales can tell a Chinook salmon from a sockeye by using their sonar to detect small differences in the fish. Researchers also have seen the many ways these majestic mammals change their behavior in response to noise from passing boats. The scientists' knowledge is vast. Yet new research shows the region's [killer whale population still is not growing](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species). Scientists are “trying to understand ... why the whales haven’t increased more than they have,” said Mike Ford, a whale expert with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). In one sense, though, scientists already know: New whale discoveries reveal that orcas face complicated threats that build on each other. “Part of what I hoped at the beginning was that it would be mostly one thing that was wrong,” said Brad Hanson, a whale expert with the NOAA. “But they all appear to be intertwined.” In the early 1960s, Puget Sound’s killer whales numbered 140. Some scientists suspect that a century before there might have been 200 or more. By the early 1970s, after companies began catching orcas to sell to marine parks, the population had dropped to just 71. After capture was outlawed a few years later, the orca population climbed to 99 in the mid-1990s. As of last year, only 82 remain. The number of whales seem to be decreasing because of three main factors. These include a lack of food, the buildup of chemicals in their bodies from pollution and disturbances from boats. The situation gets more complicated. These whales, it turns out, mostly prefer Chinook salmon, which are in short supply. In addition, noise from boats disturbs the orcas. It causes them to swim faster, work harder, slap their tails more and hunt less. This may mean the whales burn more calories just as they’re getting less food. New rules require boaters and whale-watching ships to stay 200 yards from whales. But they don't always followed the new rules, said Lynne Barre, head of protected resources for NOAA’s Seattle office. Meanwhile, these long-lived mammals already are among the most polluted animals on Earth. Chemicals from pollution build up in their fat over decades. This potentially affects their health and limits the number of offspring. Efforts to clean up Puget Sound are underway. But whales still take in old pesticides and chemicals are present in the food they eat. All these issues are even more complicated than they first appear. For example, some orca pods, or herds, are more heavily affected by the pesticide DDT than others. This is likely because they rely on fish from California rivers polluted with DDT. “They pick up (chemicals from pollution) from where they’re going,” Ford said. At the same time, other Northwest marine animals that eat fish actually are on the rise. These include seals, sea lions, even other killer whale populations. The northern killer whale population has tripled to nearly 300 since the 1960s. Northern and southern whales share similar diets. But Puget Sound’s southern whales range from California to Alaska, while the northern whales travel mostly between northern Washington and Alaska. The growth of the northern population may even be helping keep the southern whale populations down. For starters, northern whales may have a food advantage. “One thing we’re considering is that the northern-resident population may have first crack at the best salmon stocks,” Hanson said. “A lot of the West Coast fish, they come out of the rivers, they turn right and head north.” Other problems make life hard for southern whales. Two of the three southern-resident pods don't have enough young females. This group already gives birth to fewer whale calves than northern whales. “It doesn’t take much to tip the balance the wrong way,” Hanson said. Also, whales are born to parents within their pod. This can make whales more likely to have get sick or have genetic problems. There are many other whale mysteries. When killer whales die, they rarely wash up on the beach for researchers to find and study, Barre said. Instead, they just disappear and scientists never know why they died. And much of their behavior can't be understood. “Why do they sometimes decide to turn out toward the ocean and stay there for two weeks?” Barre asked.