Zoo surprised by twin pandas Laurie Thompson was sitting at her desk in the National Zoo's giant panda house Saturday night. Suddenly, she heard a noise from a video screen. It showed Mei Xiang. About 4 hours earlier, the panda had given birth to a cub. Thompson looked at the screen. There, wiggling and squawking on the floor, was a second cub. Thompson jumped out of her seat and yelled, "We have two!" It was only the third time that giant panda twins have been born in the United States. In one of the other cases, both twins died. People around the world heard about the panda cubs. The first cub was born at 5:35 p.m. The second cub arrived at 10:07 p.m. The second cub was placed in an incubator, a container to keep it warm. The cub was examined, fed and returned to its mother. Then the older cub was taken out. Both cubs squealed loudly. In panda cubs, squealing is a sign of good health. "A screaming baby panda makes us all happy," said Dr. Don Neiffer. He is the zoo's chief veterinarian. After the twin cubs were born, Thompson and a keeper watched to see if Mei could take care of both. Pandas that have twins often cannot care for both babies. One generally dies. Letting the mother care for cubs one at a time increase the chances that both will live. Unfortunately, one of the cubs died later in the week. "We watched her for a few minutes just to see how she was going to do," Thompson said. "If she picked up both of the cubs, we were going to just let her kind of do that for a little bit." Mei tried but could not figure out how to pick up both cubs. The keeper reached into the den. He took out the cub that was lying on the floor. They wrapped the cub in a towel and carried it to the keeper's office, away from the den. "We don't want Mei Xiang to hear the cub," Thompson said. It would worry her to be so far away from her cub. The cub was squealing. "They squeal until you get them nice and comfortable," she said. "They like to be snug, just like newborn babies," she said. Dr. Copper Aitken-Palmer is the chief veterinarian for an institute related to the zoo. When she arrived, she began calling people at a panda center in China. The Chinese have many more pandas in zoos and much more experience with cubs. Also she wanted to share the good news. Pandas often have twins and sometimes triplets. Mei's second cub was the stronger one, weighing almost 5 ounces, zoo director Dennis Kelly said. The first cub weighed just 3 ounces, he said. Both cubs were about the size of large mice. Veterinarians could not tell if the cubs were male or female. The cubs' eyes are not open and their ears are small bumps, Thompson said. They have fine white fur and claws. Mei has delivered two cubs that lived and two that did not live. Tai Shan, a male, was born on July 9, 2005. Bao Bao, a female, celebrated her second birthday at the zoo on Sunday. Tai Shan lives in China. China owns all the giant pandas in American zoos.