Zoo surprised by twin pandas Laurie Thompson was sitting at her desk in the National Zoo's giant panda house Saturday night. Suddenly, she heard a noise from a video screen. It showed Mei Xiang, who had given birth to a cub about four hours earlier. Thompson, a biologist, looked at the screen. There, wiggling and squawking on the floor, was a second cub. Thompson jumped out of her seat and yelled, "We have two!" It was only the third time that giant panda twins have been born in the United States. In one of the other cases, the twins did not live. People around the world heard about the panda cubs. The first cub was born at 5:35 p.m. and the second cub arrived at 10:07 p.m. The second cub was placed in an incubator, a container to keep it warm. The cub was examined, fed and returned to its mother, and then the older cub was taken out. Both cubs squealed loudly, a sign of good health. "A screaming baby panda makes us all happy," said Dr. Don Neiffer, the zoo's chief veterinarian. One of the cubs died later in the week. Zoo officials said pandas that have twins often cannot care for both babies. One generally dies. Letting the mother care for one at a time increases the chances that both cubs will live. After the cubs were born, Thompson and a zookeeper watched Mei to see what she would do. "If she picked up both of the cubs, we were going to just let her kind of do that for a little bit," Thompson said. "But she was never able to pick them both up. She was trying, but she just couldn't figure out how to do it." The keeper reached into the den and took out the cub that was lying on the floor. They wrapped the cub in a towel and carried it to the keeper's office, away from the den. "We don't want Mei Xiang to hear the cub," which would worry her, Thompson said. The cub was squealing. "They squeal until you get them nice and comfortable," she said. "They like to be snug, just like newborn babies," she said. Dr. Copper Aitken-Palmer is the chief veterinarian at an institute linked to the zoo. When she arrived, she began calling people at a panda breeding center in China. The Chinese have many more pandas in zoos and much more experience with cubs. Also she wanted to share the good news. Pandas often have twins and sometimes triplets. Mei's second cub was the stronger one, weighing almost 5 ounces, zoo director Dennis Kelly said Sunday. The first cub weighed just 3 ounces, he said. Both cubs were about the size of large mice. Veterinarians could not tell if the cubs were male or female. The cubs' eyes are not open and their ears are small "nubs," Thompson said. They have fine white fur and claws. Mei has delivered two surviving cubs since 2005, and two that did not live. Tai Shan, a male, was born on July 9, 2005. Bao Bao, a female, celebrated her second birthday at the zoo on Sunday. Tai Shan lives in China. The Asian country owns all the giant pandas in American zoos.