The birds need to keep their huddle tight for warmth in the frigid Antarctic winter, when temperatures can plummet to 58 degrees below zero. LOS ANGELES — If you’re in stop-and-go traffic, you’re probably frustrated. But not if you’re a male penguin balancing an egg on your feet in Antarctica. The traffic jam is probably keeping you alive in the bitter cold. Scientists studied huddles of emperor penguins in Antarctica. They found that waves of movement travel though the groups of penguins. It's kind of like the waves moving through cars stuck on the freeway during rush hour. But penguins keep the group as dense as possible on purpose. That density is what keeps them warm as they incubate their eggs. Emperor penguins are the only large animal species that breeds during the Antarctic winter. The continent can be as cold as 58 degrees below zero. The penguins face freezing winds that blow as fast as 124 miles per hour. So they huddle together against the harsh elements. In a huddle, their bodies can raise the temperature within two hours to as high as 98.6 degrees. The fathers-to-be cover their eggs with feathered skin known as a brood pouch. The eggs rest on top of their feet. At first glance, the penguins may not appear to move much. “If you look at a penguin huddle in real time, you hardly see any movement at all — they are all standing very still,” said Richard Gerum. He is a German scientist. He is an author of the study published in the New Journal of Physics. But watch this huddle of shuffling penguins close enough and long enough. You will see clear waves of motion through the giant crowd. One penguin takes a step and the rest follow. It’s a way of keeping order. That's something humans have trouble doing, Gerum pointed out. “When a big human crowd is together, there can be accidents,” Gerum said. “And this is something that never happens in a penguin huddle.” Scientists wanted to understand how these waves begin and behave. So the scientists closely examined video footage. They shot the video at penguin colonies near the French and German research bases on Antarctica. The penguins would move to fill in an empty space just like cars do in a traffic jam. But unlike cars, any penguin can start the movement. It doesn't matter if they’re in the front, to the back or to the side. (A car trying to start a movement from the back would end up rear-ending the car in front of it.) An earlier study by other scientists also looked at these waves. They found the waves travel through the huddle every of 35 to 55 seconds. The new study found that whenever a penguin moved more than about 2 centimeters, it started one of these traveling waves. Two centimeters is less than an inch. The 2-centimeter limit is no accident. That’s roughly twice as thick as a penguin’s warm feather layer is when it is fluffed. “This suggests that the penguins touch each other only slightly when standing in a huddle," the study authors wrote. The penguins avoid pressing their feathers. They want the huddle to stay as dense as possible. But they don't want to lose any of their own warmth. So if a penguin moves too far away, the penguin next to it moves closer. That's because a faraway neighbor allows heat to escape. But if a penguin moves too close to another, this will also cause the neighbor to move. No penguin wants its neighbor to crush its own layer of feathers. Any penguin can start a wave. The waves are a product of a simple set of rules for the space between each penguin and its immediate neighbors. And yet, these tiny movements can add up to a big, complicated order. It's similar to the patterns seen in schools of fish, flocks of birds or swarms of ants. These rules allow the penguins to stay organized, to stay warm and even combine two smaller penguin huddles together. So these emperor penguins don’t dance like the characters in “Happy Feet.” But they still perform some pretty fancy footwork.