It showed how penguins move in waves to keep warm as a group in frigid Antarctic winters. Temperatures can fall to as low as 58 degrees below zero. But penguins can warm up to 98.6 degrees. LOS ANGELES — If you're stuck in traffic, you're probably mad. But not if you’re a father penguin in Antarctica. That traffic jam is probably keeping you and your egg alive. Scientists studied huddles of emperor penguins in Antarctica. They found that waves of movement travel though the groups of penguins. It's kind of like how cars stuck on the freeway at rush hour move in waves. But penguins keep the group as dense as possible on purpose. The thick crowd is what keeps them warm as they tend their eggs. Emperor penguins are the only large animal that breeds during the Antarctic winter. Antarctica can be as cold as 58 degrees below zero. The penguins face freezing winds. The winds blow as fast as 124 miles per hour. So penguins huddle together to stay warm. In a huddle, their bodies can raise the temperature. Within two hours it can be as warm as 98.6 degrees. The fathers-to-be cover their eggs with feathered skin known as a brood pouch. The eggs rest on top of their feet. At first glance, the penguins may not appear to move much. “If you look at a penguin huddle in real time, you hardly see any movement at all — they are all standing very still,” said Richard Gerum. He is a scientist. He helped write the study. But watch this huddle of shuffling penguins close enough and long enough. You will see clear waves of motion move through the crowd. One penguin takes a step and the rest follow. It’s a way of keeping order. That's something humans have trouble doing, Gerum pointed out. “When a big human crowd is together, there can be accidents,” Gerum said. “And this is something that never happens in a penguin huddle.” Scientists wanted to understand how these waves begin and behave. So the scientists looked at video. They filmed it at penguin colonies in Antarctica. The penguins would move to fill in an empty space just like in a traffic jam. But any penguin can start the wave. It doesn't matter if they’re in the front, to the back or to the side. An earlier study by other scientists also looked at these waves. They found the waves travel through the huddle every 35 to 55 seconds. The new study noticed what happened when a penguin moved more than about 2 centimeters. That is less than one inch, but the movement started one of these traveling waves. The 2-centimeter limit is no accident. It’s roughly twice as thick as a penguin’s warm layer of feathers. That is, if the feathers are fluffed out enough. “This suggests that the penguins touch each other only slightly when standing in a huddle," the study said. The penguins avoid pressing their feathers. They want the huddle to stay as dense as possible. But they don't want to lose any of their own warmth. If a penguin moves too far away, the penguin next to it moves closer. A faraway neighbor lets heat escape. But a penguin could move too close to another. Then the neighbor will also move. No penguin wants to have its feathers crushed by a neighbor. Any penguin can start a wave. The waves come from a simple set of rules. The rules control the space between each penguin and its neighbors. And yet, these tiny movements can add up. They become a big, complicated order. It's like the patterns seen in schools of fish, flocks of birds or swarms of ants. These rules allow the penguins to stay organized. They help them stay warm. And they can even join two smaller penguin huddles together. So these emperor penguins don’t dance like the penguins in “Happy Feet.” But they still perform some pretty fancy footwork.