The Antarctic winter can be as cold as 58 degrees below zero. So penguins move in waves that maintain heat in the group. &nbsp; LOS ANGELES — If you’re in stop-and-go traffic, you’re probably frustrated. If you’re a male penguin balancing an egg on your feet in Antarctica, that traffic jam is probably keeping you alive. Scientists studying huddles of emperor penguins in Antarctica have found that waves of movement travel though the huddled mass of birds. It's similar to the waves moving through cars stuck on the freeway during rush hour. But penguins move in ways that maximize how dense the huddle is. This keeps the birds warm as they incubate their eggs. Emperor penguins are the only large animal species that breeds during the Antarctic winter. They face freezing winds that blow as fast as 124 miles per hour in an icy landscape that can be as cold as 58 degrees below zero. So they huddle together against the harsh elements. In a huddle, their bodies can raise the temperature within two hours to as high as 98.6 degrees. At first glance, the penguins may not appear to move much. The males probably can’t run anywhere in a rush, in any case. The fathers-to-be cover their eggs with feathered skin known as a brood pouch, with the eggs resting on top of their feet. “If you look at a penguin huddle in real time, you hardly see any movement at all — they are all standing very still,” said Richard Gerum. He is a German scientist. He is the first author of the study published in the New Journal of Physics. But watch this huddle of shuffling penguins close enough and long enough. You will see distinct waves of motion emerge through the feathered masses as one penguin takes a step and the rest follow. It’s a way of maintaining order — something humans have trouble doing, Gerum pointed out. “When a big human crowd is together, there can be accidents,” Gerum said. “And this is something that never happens in a penguin huddle.” To understand how these waves begin and behave, the scientists analyzed video footage. They gathered it from penguin colonies near the French and German research bases on Antarctica. Just like cars do in a traffic jam, the penguins would move to fill in an empty space. But unlike cars in a traffic jam, any penguin can initiate movement, whether they’re in the front, to the back or to the side. (A car trying to “initiate movement” from the back would end up rear-ending the car in front of it.) A previous penguin study found the waves travel through the huddle at regular intervals of 35 to 55 seconds. The new study found that whenever a penguin moved about 2 centimeters, it triggered one of these traveling waves. The 2-centimeter threshold is no accident: That’s roughly twice the thickness of a penguin’s properly fluffed layer of insulating feathers. “This suggests that the penguins touch each other only slightly when standing in a huddle," the study authors wrote. The penguins avoid compressing their feathers. They want the huddle to stay as dense as possible without losing any of their own warmth. So if a penguin moves too far away, the penguin next to it moves closer. That's because a faraway neighbor allows heat to escape. But if a penguin moves too close to another, this will also cause the neighbor to move. No penguin wants its neighbor to crush its own layer of feathers. The waves aren’t based on rank. Any penguin can start them. They’re a product of a simple set of rules governing the space between each penguin and its immediate neighbors. And yet, these tiny movements can add up to a large-scale, complicated order. It's similar to the patterns seen in schools of fish, flocks of birds or swarms of ants. These rules allow the penguins to stay organized, to maximize heat conservation and even to combine two smaller penguin huddles together. So although these emperor penguins don’t dance like the characters in “Happy Feet,” they still perform some pretty fancy footwork.