Warmer temps challenge polar bears ANCHORAGE, Alaska — Global warming has increased the speed of sea ice moving off Alaska's coasts. Polar bears are paying a price, a new study says. Most sea ice moves during the year and the bears are on an endless walk to stay in their preferred living area, said U.S. Geological Survey research scientist George Durner. He is the lead writer of the study. He compares it to living on a treadmill that has picked up speed. Change has come as ice is thinner and moving faster because of wind and ocean currents, he said. The bears were already at risk. They are stressed by fewer hunting opportunities in the warming Arctic, Durner said. Faster-moving ice likely makes the stress worse, he said. Polar bears were listed as threatened under the Endangered Species Act in 2008\. The listing came during the alarming loss of summer sea ice in recent decades. Climate models indicated the trend would go on. However, the government said the act would not be used to manage greenhouse gas emissions, or releases. Burning fossil fuels like oil, gas and wood creates greenhouse gases. The gases cause global warming. The U.S. has a plan to help polar bears survive. The plan says that without action on climate change, it is unlikely that the bears could be saved. Climate change is the primary cause of shrinking sea ice. The plan was released in January. It noted good signs such as emission goals in the Paris, France climate agreement. However, President Donald Trump left the worldwide agreement last week. He argued that it helped other countries while hurting the U.S.  Trump also has called for more oil drilling in places where polar bears live. They include sites in Alaska and its offshore waters.  Margaret Williams works for the World Wildlife Fund. She said leaving the Paris agreement is frightening. However, she said private and state efforts to reduce emissions and turn to wind or other energy are a good sign. "There's still a lot of hope," she said. The Geological Survey and University of Wyoming published the study. It recorded how the bears use more energy to stay in their home range. Researchers concluded that the bears need to eat more. They need to make up for burning more calories on faster-moving sea ice. The study did not address whether the bears walk faster or spend more time moving to keep up with the ice. Researchers estimated that bears will have to kill 1 to 3 more seals a year. It is a challenge for bears already struggling to find food. Durner compared the bears' trouble to that of some people. It is like those living in a town hit by both higher prices and rising unemployment, he said. "For the polar bear, the Arctic is becoming more expensive to live in," he said. Polar bears can go for long periods without eating but then gorge on seals. Some seals give birth on sea ice in spring and early summer. Polar bears sniff them out. Decreased sea ice has made it harder for bears to get to seals in the Beaufort Sea. It is off Alaska's coast. Researchers have noted the bears' drop in body condition, survival and abundance. The study used data from polar bears wearing radio collars in the Beaufort and the Chukchi seas. It looked at two time periods, 1987 to 1998 and 1999 to 2013. Sea ice changed in amount and thickness in the second period. Melting seasons were getting longer. Bears in the Chukchi Sea had to walk farther than south Beaufort bears, Durner said. So they burn more calories. However, they are in better shape because more food is around, he said. Amy Cutting works at the Oregon Zoo. She said that the paper is important. The study is a key piece in the growing literature on the challenges polar bears face, she said.