Some say polar bears shouldn't be cooped up in zoos. But in the Arctic, climate change is leaving the bears with less and less room to wander. PITTSBURGH, Pa. — Koda, a 10-year-old male polar bear, shares an exhibit with 14-year-old Kobe at the Pittsburgh Zoo. He comes out of a cubbyhole and steps out to a nearby ledge, swinging his head from side to side. Then he backs into the cubbyhole, still weaving his head. A moment later, he returns. He keeps doing the same thing, over and over. Koda isn't alone. Most polar bears in North American zoos do repetitive things. Experts call them "stereotypic behaviors" and say they don't seem to have any purpose. Many see these behaviors as signs of frustration. They say such patterns come from keeping the polar bears in zoo exhibits. But even in nature, it’s getting hard for the bears to act naturally. In the Arctic, polar bears typically roam hundreds or even thousands of miles. But their home is starting to melt away as the Earth warms up. Climate change is leaving the bears with less room to wander. Donald Moore is a top scientist for the Association of Zoos and Aquariums. He thinks zoos can help the polar bears. He says zoo animals represent their relatives in the wild, making people care about them. They can draw attention to the polar bears' melting home. But many animal rights groups disagree. They say polar bears in zoos are suffering. “Animals can be upset just by people looking at them,” said Rob Laidlaw of Zoocheck Canada. Laidlaw says zoos just can't give polar bears enough space. Polar bears travel up to 60 miles in a day. Even the biggest zoo exhibits are only an acre. Others share Laidlaw's concerns. In 2003, scientists at Oxford University spoke out about exhibits that house animals that roam long distances. They said zoos needed to make significant changes. If not, they should stop keeping animals like polar bears. At the time, Pittsburgh’s zoo didn’t have polar bears. Zoo officials said the zoo wouldn't add polar bears unless they had an exhibit that met their needs. Three years later, the zoo opened an exhibit called Water's Edge. The exhibit was designed with some of Laidlaw's concerns in mind. For example, the polar bears' space includes a separate back area. That way, the bears can move in and out of public view as they please. Pittsburgh’s polar bears are also given special challenges. Sometimes they crush plastic barrels. Sometimes they have to find ways to get icy fish out of other containers. Joseph Gaspard works at the Pittsburgh Zoo. He has seen repetitive behaviors from both Koda and Kobe. “But it’s hard to get at the heart of what it means,” Gaspard said. Maybe it's "just kind of a release of energy" like when humans pace, he added. Things could be worse for the polar bears. And in the wild, they probably will be. Steven C. Amstrup is the chief scientist for a group called Polar Bears International. He predicts that, by 2100, polar bears will no longer be found in the wild. Some scientists agree. Others think that a few polar bears will still be able to live in far-off areas. Right now, there are about 20,000 polar bears living in the Arctic. That sounds like a lot compared to the 4,000 tigers living in the wild. But the problems the polar bears face might be more difficult to stop. When people hunt animals too much or cut down too many trees, they can be stopped. Usually, a wildlife preserve is made. But melting ice is a different kind of problem. “You can’t build a fence to protect (bears) from climate change,” said Amstrup. That is why some conservationists like seeing polar bears in zoos. They want to keep polar bears where people can see them. They say it helps people feel connected to polar bears and want to help them. Yet no matter how much zoos help, some feel it's just not fair to keep polar bears cooped up in small exhibits.