Melting sea ice forcing polar bears to hunt for food in Alaskan villages One morning last year in one of the U.S. Arctic’s northernmost villages, Carla SimsKayotuk peeked outside her door. “And what do I see? Two huge eyes staring at me. It was a baby polar bear cub,” SimsKayotuk recalled. “My eyes got huge and his eyes got huge. I slammed my door shut.” Burning fossil fuels, such as coal, oil, and gas, as well as deforestation have pushed global temperatures up by nearly 2 degrees Fahrenheit since the 1800s. The Arctic is warming faster than anywhere else. This is driving polar bears onto the door steps of Alaskan natives.  Sea ice retreats in the sea off northern Alaska into waters that can be too deep for foraging. Polar bears are forced to find land on the coast. If they’re hungry enough, they roam into villages. Warmer temperatures have also melted some villagers' traditional outdoor freezers. The natives have relied on these for more than 100 years to store whale meat, called muktuk. Now the freezers are open to hungry bear raids. While pictures of hungry polar bears have become a symbol of climate change, they also present a real danger to Alaskans. They face the bears on their own property and do not want them to get hurt. SimsKayotuk would occasionally see a polar bear near her small village of Kaktovik as a child, but never one at her door.  “Now we have like 40 bears that are hanging around our area,” she said. “You always have to look out when you step out of your house.” With the increased numbers of bears in town, "it’s hard to keep [muktuk] safe,” she says. The more that humans and bears interact, the greater chance there is that someone or some bear will get hurt.  Last fall, a charity group shipped four specially-designed food containers to Kaktovik. They are six feet long and cost $10,000 each. SimsKayotuk is one of the people testing the containers. “They made it through the first winter and it looks like they’re doing really well into winter number two,” said Karla Dutton. She is the Alaska program leader for the charity group.  Dutton said she is trying to get more containers. There has been an increased interest from the community for the containers. “Back in 2008, people were saying, ‘Well, I still have an ice cellar’.” Not anymore. There is only one working permafrost cellar that remains in their village of about 250 people. Another nonprofit group is building an underground cellar. It might be ready for trial next winter. Meanwhile, polar bears continue to be lured to the area by bone piles leftover from the whale hunts.  “There’s some evidence that shows that bears that are nutritionally stressed are more bold,” said scientist Todd Atwood. He studies polar bears for the U.S. government. They are seeing huge decreases in the sea ice, which is bad for polar bears. They are not meant to spend long periods of time on land.   Atwood and others recently found that polar bears that would usually live on ice are now three times as likely to come on shore as they were 35 years ago. Scientists also found that the polar bear population around the sea in northern Alaska rapidly decreased from about 1,500 to just over 900 from 2006 to 2010\. Also, the size of the average female is down by about 66 pounds, he said. After SimsKayotuk saw the cub outside her door, she called the Polar Bear Patrol. It is the team tasked with scaring the bears away from town with cars, quads, noise and beanbag guns. Eventually, the cub left with its mother and sibling. No one was hurt. But these meetings could grow more dangerous as the animals stay longer and get hungrier.