Warmer temps challenge polar bears ANCHORAGE, Alaska — Polar bears spend a great deal of time on sea ice. The ice is moving faster now. A study says the bears are having a harder time because of it.  George Durner is a scientist. He is the main writer of the study. The ice is off Alaska's coasts. Most sea ice moves during the year. The bears have to keep walking to stay where they want to live, Durner said. The ice is thinner and is moving faster. The wind and water move the ice, he said. The ice moves faster because of global warming.  Scientists think that the ice is melting faster because the Earth is warmer. Scientists think that it is because of the fuel that people use. People burn these fuels to make energy. Many things from cars to lights run on this energy. Burning the fuels creates greenhouse gases. The gases become trapped in the air above. They store heat, making the world hotter. Scientists call this global warming. It also is called climate change.  Polar bears were already having trouble. They eat seals but they have not had as much chance to hunt, Durner said. Faster-moving ice gives them more trouble, he said.  The government and the University of Wyoming did the study. It said the bears use more energy to stay in their home area. Scientists said the bears need to eat more. They need to make up for moving more on the faster ice.  The study said that bears will have to kill 1 to 3 more seals a year. It is hard for the bears. They were already having trouble finding food. The bears can go a long time without eating. Then they have a big meal. Some seals give birth on sea ice in spring and early summer. Polar bears sniff them out. Polar bears were listed as threatened. It was under the Endangered Species Act. Endangered means a plant or animal is dying out. It is in danger of becoming extinct. If an animal is extinct, there are no members of the species left.  The U.S. has a plan to help polar bears survive. The plan says that without work on climate change, the bears might not be saved. The plan said the Paris, France climate deal was a good idea. Many countries said they would follow it. It was to help with climate change.  President Donald Trump left the deal, though. He said that it helped other countries and hurt the U.S.