Melting sea ice forcing polar bears to hunt for food in Alaskan villages One morning, Carla SimsKayotuk peeked outside her door. “And what do I see? Two huge eyes staring at me. It was a baby polar bear,” she recalled. Carla lives in Alaska in a part called the Arctic. Earth is hotter than it was 200 years ago. Much of the heat is from people burning coal, oil, and gas for cars and houses. The Arctic is warming faster than anywhere else.  Sea ice is melting around Alaska. This is where polar bears hunt for food. They are forced to find land on the coast. If they are hungry enough, they roam into villages. Higher temperatures also melted outdoor freezers. The people of Alaska have used these for over 100 years to store whale meat. They call the meat muktuk. Now the freezers are open to hungry bears. Carla would occasionally see a polar bear near her village as a child. “Now we have like 40 bears,” she said.  With more bears in town, it's hard to keep the whale meat safe, she says. Last fall, the village received four special food containers. They were expensive. Karla Dutton helped get the containers. She said they worked well in the villages. More villagers want the containers now. Back in 2008, people still used their ice cellars. Not anymore. There is only one working ice cellar in their village of about 250 people. For now, polar bears continue to come to the village. They are attracted to the bone piles leftover from the whale hunts.  Todd Atwood studies polar bears for the U.S. government. He says that hungrier bears are braver about going into towns. This is bad for polar bears. They are not meant to spend long periods of time on land.   Todd found that polar bears are a lot more likely to come on shore today. Also, there are far fewer polar bears in Alaska. In four years, it went from about 1,500 bears to just over 900.  When Carla saw the baby polar bear outside, she called the Polar Bear Patrol. It is the team that scares bears away from town. Eventually, the bear left. No one was hurt. Things could get more dangerous, though.  The animals might stay longer. They might also get hungrier.