Melting sea ice forcing polar bears to hunt for food in Alaskan villages Carla SimsKayotuk peeked outside one morning last year in one of the U.S. Arctic’s northernmost villages. “And what do I see? Two huge eyes staring at me. It was a baby polar bear cub,” SimsKayotuk recalled. “My eyes got huge and his eyes got huge. I slammed my door shut.” Burning fossil fuels, such as coal, oil, and gas, as well as deforestation have pushed global temperatures up by nearly 2 degrees Fahrenheit since the 1800s. The Arctic is warming faster than anywhere else. This is driving polar bears onto the doorsteps of native Alaskans. Sea ice retreats in the Beaufort Sea off north Alaska into waters that can be too deep for foraging. Increasing numbers of polar bears then are forced to find food on the coast. If they’re hungry enough, they roam into arctic villages. Warmer temperatures have also melted locals’ traditional permafrost freezers. The natives have relied on these for more than 100 years to store whale meat, called muktuk, after their hunt. Now they are open to hungry bear raids. While images of hungry polar bears have become a symbol of the effects of climate change, they present a real threat to Alaskans. They face the bears on their own property and do not want them to get hurt. SimsKayotuk would occasionally see a polar bear near her small village of Kaktovik as a child, but never one at her door.  “Now we have like 40 bears that are hanging around our area,” she said. “You always have to look out when you step out of your house.” With the increased numbers of bears in town, "it’s hard to keep [muktuk] safe,” she says. The more humans and bears interact, the greater chance there is that someone or some bear will get hurt. Now, there are two efforts underway to help properly store food. Last fall, a nonprofit group called Defenders of Wildlife shipped four specially-designed stainless steel food containers to Kaktovik. They are six feet long and cost $10,000 each. SimsKayotuk is one of the people testing the containers. She hopes it can teach the bears that there is nothing for them to eat in the villages. “They made it through the first winter and it looks like they’re doing really well into winter number two,” said Karla Dutton. She is the Alaska program leader for the nonprofit group. She feels good about the containers, but wants to see if they continue to be successful.  Dutton said she is trying to get more containers because, “I think everyone will need to find an alternative to their ice cellars.” She said there’s been an increased interest from the community for the storage containers. “Back in 2008, people were saying, ‘Well, I still have an ice cellar.’” Not anymore. SimsKayotuk said there’s only one working permafrost cellar that remains in their village of about 250 people. The nonprofit Kaktovik Community Foundation is also building an underground cellar. It might be ready for trial next winter. Meanwhile, polar bears continue to be lured to the area by bone piles leftover from the whale hunts.  While this situation has turned Kaktovik into a popular tourist spot, the bears are starting to show up earlier and stay later as the open water season gets longer. If there isn’t any food, they might start wandering into town. “There’s some evidence that shows that bears that are nutritionally stressed are more bold,” said scientist Todd Atwood. He researches polar bears at the U.S. Geological Survey, a government agency. They are seeing huge decreases in the sea ice, which for polar bears is “not really part of their historical life history to spend extended periods of time on land.” Atwood and others recently found that polar bears that would usually live on ice in the southern Beaufort Sea are now three times as likely to come ashore as they were in the mid-1980s. Researchers also found that the Beaufort Sea polar bear population rapidly dwindled from about 1,500 to just over 900 from 2006 to 2010\. Also, the size of the average female has decreased by about 66 pounds, or about 7 percent, he said. After SimsKayotuk saw the cub outside her door, she called the Polar Bear Patrol, the team responsible for scaring the bears away from town with cars, quads, noise and beanbag guns. Eventually, the cub left with its mother and sibling and no one was hurt. But these meetings could grow more dangerous. The animals could stay longer and get hungrier.