Whether they live in a zoo or on the shrinking Arctic ice, life can be stressful for the bears. PITTSBURGH, Pa. — Koda, the 10-year-old male polar bear at the Pittsburgh Zoo, emerges from a cubbyhole atop the exhibit he shares with 14-year-old Kobe. He steps out to a nearby ledge, swinging his head from side to side. Then he backs into the cubbyhole, head still weaving. A moment later, he comes back out to start the pattern over again. He keeps doing the same thing, over and over. Koda's behavior is not all that odd. An estimated 85 percent of polar bears in North American zoos engage in repetitive actions like these. Experts say these "stereotypic behaviors" are apparently purposeless. Many believe they are the result of confining polar bears in zoo exhibits. Laurel Braitman, author of “Animal Madness," agrees. She has expressed concern about repetitive behaviors like Koda's, calling them a show of frustration. But even in nature, it’s increasingly hard for bears to act naturally. In the Arctic, polar bears typically roam hundreds or even thousands of miles. But because of global climate change, the ice they tread is shrinking. Donald Moore, a scientist at the Association of Zoos and Aquariums, says polar bears are losing their natural surroundings. Moore believes zoos can help. He says that it's important for zoo animals to represent their relatives in the wild, so people will care about them. But some people aren't convinced. “I think there’s very little question about whether bears suffer in (zoos),” said Rob Laidlaw of Zoocheck Canada, an animal rights group. “Animals can be upset just by people looking at them.” Laidlaw says zoos just can't give polar bears the same experiences they have in nature. Polar bears are used to traveling up to 60 miles in a day. Even the largest zoo exhibits measure less than an acre. Others share Laidlaw's concerns. In 2003, researchers at Oxford University argued that zoos must make significant changes to exhibits for roaming animals. Otherwise, animals like polar bears should be left out of zoos altogether. Pittsburgh’s zoo didn’t have polar bears back then. At the time, the zoo told the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, “we won’t have them unless we have a suitable exhibit.” Three years later, the Pittsburgh Zoo opened a $12.5 million exhibit called Water's Edge. It featured elements that Laidlaw stressed as important to the polar bears' well-being. For example, the layout includes a separate back area. This design allows the bears to move in and out of public view as they wish. Pittsburgh’s polar bears are also given “enrichment” activities throughout the day. Sometimes they crush plastic barrels. Other times they have to figure out how to get icy mixtures of fish and lard out of containers. Pittsburgh Zoo's Joseph Gaspard acknowledges that Koda and Kobe both exhibit repetitive behavior at times. “But it’s hard to get at the heart of what it means,” Gaspard said. Maybe it's "just kind of a release of energy" like when humans pace, he added. Things could be worse for the polar bears. And in the wild, they probably will be. Steven C. Amstrup is the top scientist for a group called Polar Bears International. Amstrup believes wild polar bears won't exist in 2100. Others think that polar bears will still exist, but only in the most remote areas. Right now, an estimated 20,000 polar bears live in the Arctic. By comparison, there are fewer than 4,000 tigers in the wild. It might seem like polar bears aren't really in that much trouble yet, but the problems they face are very difficult to address. When an animal species is in danger, it usually has to do with people hunting them or destroying the area where they live. As Amstrup pointed out, there are steps people can take to prevent those things from happening. But polar bears face a much different kind of threat. “You can’t build a fence to protect (bears) from climate change,” said Amstrup. Polar bears live much of the year on the Arctic ice, where they hunt seals and breed. But as global temperatures warm, it takes longer for the ice to form. This leaves the bears trapped on land, where they must live off of their stored fat. They grow weak and produce sickly cubs. As a result, some conservationists like the idea of using zoo exhibits to keep polar bears in the public eye. They say people can relate to polar bears and that makes them want to help. Zoos might help people understand the polar bears' situation, but they are still controversial. Many insist that zoo animals shouldn't have to suffer in small exhibits to help their relatives in the wild.