One of only 20 ligers in the world Lions and tigers might seem like natural rivals. But every so often, they become fond of one another.  When the two animals have a baby, they make one of nature's most intriguing animals: the liger. Tsar the liger cub, born from an extremely rare lion-tiger pairing, was born recently. He has become a hit for a traveling Russian zoo. Stretched out in the zoo director's van, the stripy Tsar — named for the Russian word for "emperor" — impatiently awaits his milk bottle. "We don't leave him in a cage — it's too cold outside," said zoo leader Erik Airapetyan. "We keep him here with us — he even sleeps in our bed." Tsar was born on November 11 while the zoo was on tour in southern Russia. He has the orange-brown fur of a lion cub, but is instead covered in black stripes. Airapetyan and his team are feeding Tsar with goat's milk. So far, he drinks about a liter, or two pints, a day. Tsar's mother, Princess, the zoo's only tigress, had a difficult birth and has been unable to nurse him with milk. She has given birth to a total of three liger cubs, but only Tsar has survived, according to Airapetyan. Combination lion-tigers like this are very rare, explained Dmitry Miloserdov, a researcher at Moscow's Darwin Museum of natural history. Generally, ligers "are weaker than lion cubs or ordinary young tigers," he continued. "But if you take good care of them, they can grow up and live a long time," he told a French news outlet. However, he says, male ligers cannot reproduce. Mindful that Tsar's survival is against the odds, the zoo is fulfilling his every desire. He has an unlimited milk supply, sleeps 16 hours a day and plays whenever he wants. "We're all taking care of him — we're very proud of our little treasure. He's unique, our stripy lion," Airapetyan smiled. Neither Princess or Tsar's father, Caesar the lion, have access to the cub for the moment. Tsar is 2 1/2 months old and weighs five kilograms, or about 11 pounds. He is "still too small and fragile" to meet his parents, said Airapetyan. Princess the tiger and Caesar the lion have lived in neighboring cages for years and "are used to one another," according to the zoo director. Every time Princess wants to have babies, the zoo faces a tricky dilemma. It can bring Caesar to her as a mate, or it can deal with an angry Princess. "So we dared to half-open the dividing wall between the cages," Airapetyan recalled. Once Airapetyan saw everything was going well, his team took the risk of leaving the cats face-to-face. When it became clear Princess was pregnant, "everyone was so happy," he said. "It's so rare, a liger! Right now there are only about 20 in the world," he added, grinning from ear to ear. Ligers can only be born in captivity, Miloserdov noted. That's because almost all wild lions live in sub-Saharan Africa, while tigers dwell in the jungles of Asia. The same goes for tigons — cubs that are born to a lioness and a male tiger. They aren't found in the wild. "They only cross over in India," Miloserdov said. But even there, "their cycles of reproduction are very different"  For now, Tsar is only the size of a large house cat and "he often sleeps in my arms," said Airapetyan. "But when our little king grows up, he will surely be heavier than his parents," he predicted. Ligers can weigh more than 400 kilograms (880 pounds). Meanwhile, tigers can reach a maximum weight of about 300 kg, and a lion can reach 250 kg.  Hercules the liger lives at a wildlife reserve in the United States. He is the world's largest living cat at 10 feet 11 inches long, according to the Guinness World Records book.