One of only 20 ligers in the world It sounds like something out of a fairy tale: a mix between a lion and a tiger.  But the "liger" is a real animal, and there is one living in Russia. Tsar the liger cub was born recently. His mother is a tiger and his father is a lion.  He has become a popular sight for a traveling Russian zoo. Stretched out in a van, Tsar impatiently awaits his milk bottle. The striped cat was named for the Russian word for "emperor," and he is being treated like one. "We don't leave him in a cage — it's too cold outside," said zoo leader Erik Airapetyan. "We keep him here with us." Tsar even sleeps in Airapetyan's bed. Tsar was born on November 11\. He has the orange-brown fur of a lion cub, but is instead covered in black stripes. Airapetyan and his team are feeding Tsar with goat's milk. So far, he drinks about a quart per day. Tsar's mother, Princess, had trouble birthing him. She cannot feed him with her milk.  Mixed lion-tigers like this are very rare, explained Dmitry Miloserdov. He's a scientist at Moscow's Darwin Museum of natural history. Generally, ligers "are weaker than lion cubs or ordinary young tigers," he continued. "But if you take good care of them, they can grow up and live a long time," he told a French news company. However, he says, male ligers cannot become fathers. The fact that Tsar exists is a surprise to the zoo. They are giving him anything he desires.  He gets lots of milk. He sleeps 16 hours a day and plays whenever he wants. "We're all taking care of him — we're very proud of our little treasure," Airapetyan smiled. Tsar is 2 1/2 months old and weighs about 11 pounds. He is still too small and weak to meet his parents, said Airapetyan. For years, Princess the tiger and Caesar the lion have lived in cages next to each other. They "are used to one another," says the zoo leader. Every time Princess wants to have babies, the zoo faces a tricky problem. It can choose to bring Caesar to her as a mate, and they can try to make a baby. If the zoo does not bring Caesar to her, Princess could get angry. The zoo decided to open a wall between the cages. The two big cats met. Once Airapetyan saw everything was going well, his team took the risk of leaving the cats together. Soon, it became clear Princess was going to have a baby liger. "Everyone was so happy," Airapetyan said. "It's so rare, a liger! Right now there are only about 20 in the world," he added, smiling from ear to ear. Ligers can only be born in zoos, Miloserdov says. That's because almost all wild lions live in Africa, while tigers live in the jungles of Asia.  There is also such thing as a tigon — a cub born to a female lion and a male tiger. They aren't found in the wild either. For now, Tsar is only the size of a large house cat. "He often sleeps in my arms," said Airapetyan. "But when our little king grows up, he will surely be heavier than his parents," he says. Larger ligers can weigh around 900 pounds. Tigers can get up to more than 650 pounds. Lions can reach about 550 pounds. Another liger lives at a zoo in the United States. His name is Hercules. He's the world's largest living cat at 10 feet 11 inches long, according to the Guinness World Records book.