All-girl salamanders flourish Is there such a thing as an all-female society? The ancient Greeks told stories of a civilization of warrior women, where no men were allowed. Wonder Woman, the comic-book heroine, came from a ladies-only utopia called Paradise Island. These societies were made up, though. Yet in the real world, there is at least one all-female society. It is in a wetland in rural Ohio, and it is full of salamanders. Robert Denton is a biologist at Ohio State University. He and his coworkers just published a study in the Journal of Zoology about an unusual species of all-female salamanders. These salamanders can have babies all by themselves. They do so by cloning, making copies of themselves rather than mating with partners.  Cloning has a major downside, though. When animals have children by cloning, their genes do not mix. Their children inherit only one parent's genes, rather than a mix of genes from mother and father. Genetic mixing usually helps species to stay healthy. Ohio's all-female salamanders have come upon a clever solution. They sometimes "steal" sperm left behind on trees and leaves by male salamanders of other salamander species. The sperm contains different genes they can pass on to their children. The salamanders have another advantage that lets them stay healthy without mixing their genes with those of males. Each salamander has extra sets of genes.  Normally, animals inherit two sets of genes, one from each parent. Cloning, which only passes on a single set of genes, therefore, puts a species at a disadvantage. The all-female salamanders, however, can have between two and five times the normal amount of genetic material. In other words, salamanders get two or more sets of genes from their mothers.  Animals with more than two sets of chromosomes (structures containing genes) are called "polyploid." Denton said polyploid salamanders have been around for about 6 million years. That is far longer than most other species that have offspring by cloning. Since animals tend to have a less varied gene pool, they have more trouble adapting when living conditions change. As a result, they usually die off. Denton's study found that the all-female salamanders in the wetlands of Ohio are different. They actually seem to be better off than other salamanders in some respects. Denton and his coworkers reported that if the all-female salamanders lose their tails, they can regrow them 36 percent faster than other species of salamanders. If you are living in an Ohio swamp, it seems, you may be better off without men. The idea for the study came from Monica Saccucci, who is currently a medical student at the University of Cincinnati in Ohio. At the time, she was still a college student working in the same lab as Denton. First, Saccucci went into the wetlands near Ohio State to collect eggs from both polyploid and ordinary salamanders. Once they hatched and reached adulthood, she cut off 40 percent of each salamander's tail. She then watched to see how fast the tails would grow back.  The fact that salamanders can regrow their tails at all is somewhat amazing. The polyploid salamanders can do so with unusual speed. Within 10 weeks, they had new, full-length tails. It took ordinary salamanders another five weeks to regrow their tails.  The findings made sense to Denton. Polyploid creatures simply have more of the equipment necessary to build back what they have lost, he explained. Being able to quickly regrow lost limbs gives the all-female salamanders a big advantage. Salamanders' tails help them stay alive. In the water, they use their tails to swim. On land, they sometimes use their tails to distract predators. Being able to regrow one quickly, in the event their tails get snapped off by a predator, for example, makes it more likely the all-female salamanders will stay alive to have children. "They get injured a lot," Saccucci said in a news release. "If you can't heal and grow back, you're dead."