Total ivory ban may not be enough It appears certain now that almost all legal domestic ivory markets will be closed. This is the plan A of a large consortium of animal rights and welfare organizations aimed at stopping elephant poaching. The animal rights advocates share the belief that legal trade provides cover for illegal trade and stimulates demand. Do away with legal trade, say the ban proponents, and demand will fall. Any elephant ivory seen for sale will be illegal, resulting in the dual benefits of making it easy for law enforcement to take action and for consumers to avoid buying an illegal product. And increasingly this is a majority position. In September, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature adopted a motion recommending the closing of domestic ivory markets globally. A few weeks later in October a similar proposal was adopted at the 17th Conference of the Parties of CITES, the international convention that monitors wildlife trade. Animal welfare proponents believe that selling ivory legally creates a cover for when the elephant from which the ivory came was illegally hunted. “It’s a pity that countries with existing legal domestic ivory markets ignored the risks legal markets may bring to elephant populations" due to the opportunities they create for laundering illegal ivory, said Grace Ge Gabriel. She is the Asia regional director for the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW). The illegal laundering occurs under the pretense of legal sales, she said. President Xi Jinping of China and outgoing U.S. President Barack Obama apparently agree with the long-standing argument of the Wildlife Conservation Society and IFAW that legal trade promotes illegal trade. Both announced last year that they would prohibit ivory sales, as far as national laws in each country would allow. Most European Union countries are also further restricting sales of ivory. In Africa, all but a few holdouts have already banned ivory trade, as have most countries in Asia. In the near future, there is a good chance that almost all major ivory consuming countries will have domestic ivory bans in place. So, will these bans solve the elephant poaching problem? Probably not. As Tom Milliken, an ivory expert from wildlife trade monitoring group Traffic, said: “All the paper protection in the world" is not going to make up for poor enforcing of laws and corrupt sellers. I led a study of the drivers of ivory demand in eastern Asia in 2015\. We found that roughly 200 metric tons (440,925 pounds) of illegal ivory were smuggled annually into China-Hong Kong during the peak of the elephant poaching crisis from 2009 to 2014\. We estimated that only about 10 metric tons (22,046 pounds) of it was processed a year to satisfy consumer demand. The balance of 190 metric tons (418,878 pounds) a year was most likely stockpiled by speculators. These were people apparently betting that ivory prices would remain high. The study estimated that about 3.5 metric tons (7,716 pounds) of ivory was consumed in China legally each year. It came from ivory purchased in 2008 in southern Africa in a CITES-approved sale. That makes total consumer consumption about 13.5 metric tons (29,762 pounds) a year in China. Doing the math, three-quarters by weight of all ivory sold in China was illegal from 2009 to 2014. If you count by pieces, rather than weight, more than 90 percent of ivory sold in China was illegal. That’s because legal outlets produce and sell much larger pieces than illegal ones. Illegal markets sell more jewelry items and trinkets, which weigh less. What is plan B for closing the illegal market in China? The country takes in an estimated 70 percent of all poached elephant tusks from Africa. Closing the legal market will account for only 10 percent of the ivory consumed in China. The illegal ivory that consumers buy will increase from 90 to 100 percent of the market. Have the groups that are pushing for closure of legal domestic ivory markets made plans for closing the much larger black market? I posed this question to Alexander Rhodes, head of Stop Ivory, at the 105-metric ton (231,485-pound) ivory burning event in Kenya last April. Stop Ivory is a close partner with WCS and IFAW. He said, “Yes, that is something to think about.” Studies have found that the majority of illegal ivory in China and elsewhere is sold online in members-only chat rooms and through social media sites. It is difficult to monitor those sites. The goal of a total ban on legal international and domestic ivory markets is in sight. However, waving the victory flags is perhaps hasty. Elephants still have to worry that their tusks – obtained exclusively from illegal killing – will continue supplying the huge black market. And if it is speculation and stockpiling of tusks, rather than high consumer demand, that is driving poaching, plan B must take this inconvenient fact into consideration. Plan B had better be good. _Daniel Stiles has been investigating ivory markets around the world for more than 15 years._