Total ivory ban may not be enough More and more countries are making laws to protect elephants. Elephants are hunted for their tusks, or teeth. Their tusks are made of ivory. People sell ivory even though sometimes it is not allowed.  Many groups get together to protect animals. Their leaders are animal rights leaders. They hope to stop elephant poaching. Poaching is hunting that is against the law. Sometimes selling ivory is allowed. It depends on where it came from. Selling that is allowed is called "legal." Selling that is against the law is called "illegal." Animal rights leaders think that legal selling causes problems. It might make other selling easier. Stop the legal selling, some people say. That will make it so that no one wants ivory, they say. Any elephant ivory for sale will be illegal. This will make it easy for police to know that all of it is illegal.  In September, a nature group said ivory selling should stop. Next, an animal group agreed. President Barack Obama said that he would stop ivory sales. Many other countries are doing the same thing. Soon, almost all main ivory-buying countries might have law changes in place. Will these laws fix the elephant poaching problem? Probably not. Tom Milliken works for an animal group. He said all the protection in the world is not going to make up for dishonesty. I did a study of why people want ivory. We looked at illegal ivory brought into China from 2009 to 2014\. This time was the worst of the elephant poaching problems. Most of the ivory sold in China was illegal from 2009 to 2014\. It's likely that more was saved to sell later.  What is the plan for closing the illegal market in China? The country takes in more than half of poached tusks from Africa. Groups want to stop legal ivory sales. What about stopping the illegal sales? Alexander Rhodes works to help elephants. I asked him about stopping illegal sales. He said, “Yes, that is something to think about.” Studies have found that most illegal ivory is sold on computers. It is hard to stop that.  Legal selling of ivory might end soon. Still, it might be too soon to be happy. Elephants still have to worry. Their tusks could still be sold by people not following the law. _Daniel Stiles has been studying ivory for more than 15 years._