Total ivory ban may not be enough More and more countries are making all ivory sales against the law. It's part of a worldwide effort to protect elephants. This is the plan A of several animal rights groups. The goal is to stop elephant poaching, which is hunting that is against the law. Elephants are hunted for their ivory tusks, or teeth. Animal rights leaders believe that legal, or allowed, trade makes it easier for other trade to go on. Many countries have laws that make some ivory sales illegal, or against the law. Animal rights leaders also think legal sales increase demand. Stop the legal trade, some people say, and demand will fall. Any elephant ivory seen for sale will be against the law. This will make it easy for police to take action and for people to avoid buying an illegal product. In September, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature recommended closing ivory markets. In October, a wildlife convention adopted a plan like it. Animal rights leaders believe that selling ivory legally creates a cover for laundering. Laundering the ivory means hiding where it came from.  Grace Ge Gabriel works for the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW). She said the illegal laundering is made to look like legal selling.  President Xi Jinping of China and U.S. President Barack Obama announced that they would stop ivory sales, as far as laws in each country would allow. They seem to agree with the Wildlife Conservation Society and IFAW that legal trade helps with illegal trade. Many European countries are also further limiting sales of ivory. In Africa, all but a few have outlawed ivory trade, as have most countries in Asia. Soon, there is a good chance that almost all main ivory-buying countries will have law changes in place. So, will these laws solve the elephant poaching problem? Probably not. Tom Milliken is an ivory expert from the wildlife group Traffic. He said all the protection in the world is not going to make up for widespread dishonesty. I led a study of what causes ivory demand in Asia in 2015\. We looked at illegal ivory brought into China-Hong Kong from 2009 to 2014\. This time was the peak of the elephant poaching problems. By our math based on weight, three-fourths of all ivory sold in China was illegal from 2009 to 2014\. It's likely that more was stockpiled, or saved, to sell in the future.  If you count by pieces rather than weight, more than 9 out of 10 pieces of ivory sold in China were illegal. That’s because legal places sell larger pieces than illegal ones. Illegal markets sell more jewelry and trinkets, which weigh less. What is plan B for closing the illegal market in China? The country takes in more than half of all poached elephant tusks from Africa. Have the groups that want to close legal ivory markets made plans to close the larger illegal market? I asked this question of Alexander Rhodes last April while he was in Kenya. He is the head of Stop Ivory. He said, “Yes, that is something to think about.” Studies have found that most illegal ivory is sold online on some websites. It is difficult to watch those sites. The goal of outlawing all allowed ivory markets is in sight. However, it might be too soon to celebrate. Elephants still have to worry that their tusks will be hunted for illegal sellers of ivory.  If people are trying to build up a collection of tusks, it could still drive poaching. Plan B must consider this. Plan B had better be good. _Daniel Stiles has been studying ivory markets for more than 15 years._