Turtle facility gets major upgrade The South Carolina Aquarium has a lot to celebrate. On May 27, it opened its new Zucker Family Sea Turtle Recovery center. The center is a hospital just for sea turtles. It will also be an education center. The center will teach people about sea turtles. It will show how the sea creatures are rescued and released. The South Carolina Aquarium opened 17 years ago. It has treated more than 200 sea turtles. At first, the aquarium did not plan to become a turtle hospital. That idea came later. It happened after a large sea turtle came to the aquarium. The turtle was named Stinky. It was very sick. Stinky inspired the aquarium to open its Sea Turtle Care Center. The center is now a major hospital for sea turtles. ## Trading Kiddie Pools For New Tanks The hospital used to be very small. It did not even have tanks for the turtles. Instead, the creatures were kept in kiddie pools. Now the hospital is an advanced treatment center. It has the very best tools. Recently, it became clear that the hospital was getting too big for its building. The new center is much bigger. It has more room for turtle patients and visitors. It also has new tanks, which are big enough to hold larger turtles. These big turtles are called loggerheads. They can weigh more than 300 pounds. The new tanks are also made with special glass. It allows visitors to see in without letting the turtles see out. This keeps the turtles from getting scared. They can be nervous around people. ## Guests Can Be Pretend Turtle Doctors Kelly Thorvalson is a scientist. She is the leader of the sea turtle rescue program. Each tank will have a tablet with it, she says. Visitors will be able to use the tablets to learn more about the turtles. The new center also has mock medical stations. These use a special technology. It is called augmented reality. It works by adding digital pictures to what we see in the real world. The stations will let visitors look at virtual sea turtles. These turtles are not real. But they look like they are right in front of you. Guests can even pretend to be a sea turtle doctor. They can do surgery and save virtual turtles.  Finally, the new center has a theater. It will show videos about a sea turtle's journey. This journey begins at the aquarium. It ends with the turtle returning to the ocean.