Turtle facility gets major upgrade The South Carolina Aquarium recently marked an important milestone. On May 27, it opened the doors to its new Zucker Family Sea Turtle Recovery facility. Located alongside the banks of the Charleston Harbor, the recovery center is a state-of-the-art facility that will serve as a hospital for sick and injured sea turtles. The center will also serve as an educational facility offering the public a glimpse into the rescue, rehabilitation and release of these aquatic reptiles. Since opening 17 years ago, more than 200 sea turtle patients have passed through the aquarium’s doors. However, it didn’t originally set out to become a world-class turtle hospital. In fact, it took the unexpected arrival of one severely dehydrated loggerhead named Stinky to inspire the creation of the aquarium’s current Sea Turtle Care Center. The hospital is now South Carolina’s main hub for sea turtle rehabilitation. Located inside the building's basement, the hospital has grown in size over the years. What was once a slapdash facility made up of kiddie pools is now a facility equipped with the latest technology to help diagnose and treat patients. Over time, however, it became apparent that the hospital was outgrowing its facility. It would have to expand if it wanted to involve the community with its mission to help save sea turtles in ways that went beyond simply inviting them to releases back to the ocean. ## Fancy Tanks The new facility significantly expands both the patient and visitor areas. The new, upgraded tanks nearly double the hospital's previous patient capacity, and can accommodate larger turtles, including adult loggerheads that can reach sizes of more than 300 pounds. The new tanks were designed to keep turtles' health at the forefront. That means they are equipped with one-way glass so that visitors can peer in but turtles can't see them. The glass also lets veterinarians and volunteers do visual examinations of the turtles at all angles. This minimizes the need for physical human interaction, which can be stressful to patients. The tanks are also set behind a glass wall to minimize any human disturbances such as tapping on the glass. “As architects were designing the tanks, we had animal-care experts in the meetings to ensure that the final designs would be best for our patients,” says Kelly Thorvalson, sea turtle rescue program manager. “Each tank will be equipped with a tablet where visitors can swipe through and learn about each patient’s medical situation, what it looked like ... upon admission and more.” The new facility also gives visitors visual access into an operating room and a CT scan room. There they can see chief veterinarian Shane Boylan and his team working on patients. Turtle injuries can range from boating accidents and entanglements with fishing lines to digesting plastic. ## Majority Of Patients Are Saved “Just like in a typical hospital, we triage patients,” Boylan says. “This can mean stopping any bleeding, assessing injuries, conducting supportive therapy such as oxygen and administering drugs or vitamins. Nine times out of ten, we can save patients, even those with catastrophic wounds.” In addition, the new facility features mock medical stations using augmented reality technology. The stations will allow visitors to perform triage steps on mock sea turtle patients, like checking vital signs just as Boylan does. Finally, the new care center also features a 40-seat classroom and theater. Daily programs and videos will showcase a sea turtle's journey from being a patient to his or her return to the ocean. “Education is a major part of the recovery plan,” Thorvalson says. “[The new facility] will allow us to educate guests in a more powerful and meaningful way.”