Turtle facility gets major upgrade The South Carolina Aquarium recently marked an important milestone. On May 27, it opened the doors to its new Zucker Family Sea Turtle Recovery facility. Located by the Charleston Harbor, the recovery center is a state-of-the-art facility that will serve as a hospital for sick and injured sea turtles. The center will also serve as an educational facility. It will offer the public a glimpse into the rescue, rehabilitation and release of these sea creatures. The South Carolina Aquarium first opened 17 years ago. Since then, more than 200 sea turtle patients have passed through its doors. The aquarium didn't originally plan to become a world-class turtle hospital. In fact, it took the unexpected arrival of one severely dehydrated loggerhead named Stinky to inspire the creation of the aquarium’s current Sea Turtle Care Center. The hospital is now South Carolina’s main hub for treating sick and injured sea turtles. Located inside the building's basement, the hospital has grown in size over the years. When it began, it was a slapdash facility made up of kiddie pools substituting for tanks. Now it's a cutting-edge hospital equipped with the latest technology to help diagnose and treat patients. Over time, it became clear that the hospital was beginning to outgrow its facility. It would have to expand if it wanted to do more to involve the community with its mission to help save sea turtles. ## New Tanks Designed To Protect Turtles The new facility significantly expands both the patient and visitor areas. New upgraded tanks nearly double the hospital's previous patient capacity. They're also big enough now to house larger turtles, including adult loggerheads that can reach sizes of more than 300 pounds. The new tanks were designed with turtles' health in mind. That means they have one-way glass so that visitors can see in but turtles can't see out. The glass also lets veterinarians and volunteers do visual examinations of the turtles at all angles. This minimizes the need for physical human interaction, which can be stressful for turtles. The tanks are also set behind a glass wall to minimize any human disturbances such as tapping on the glass. Kelly Thorvalson is the manager of the sea turtle rescue program. She says that animal-care experts were invited to assist the architects designing the new tanks. This was to make sure that "the final designs would be best for our patients,” Thorvalson says. “Each tank will be equipped with a tablet where visitors can swipe through and learn about each patient’s medical situation, what it looked like ... upon admission and more.” The new facility also gives visitors visual access into an operating room. There they can see chief veterinarian Shane Boylan and his team working on patients. Turtle injuries can range from boating accidents and entanglements with fishing lines to digesting plastic. ## Survival Rate At Hospital Is High “Just like in a typical hospital, we triage patients,” Boylan says. That means the veterinarians quickly study the turtles' injuries to decide the best course of treatment. "Nine times out of ten, we can save patients, even those with catastrophic wounds," Boylan says. In addition, the new facility features mock medical stations using augmented reality technology. The stations will allow visitors to examine mock sea turtle patients. Finally, the new care center also features a 40-seat classroom and theater. Daily programs and videos will showcase a sea turtle's journey from being a patient to his or her return to the ocean. “Education is a major part of the recovery plan,” Thorvalson says. “[The new facility] will allow us to educate guests in a more powerful and meaningful way.”