Turtle facility gets major upgrade The South Carolina Aquarium has something big to celebrate. On May 27, it opened the doors to its new Zucker Family Sea Turtle Recovery facility. The center will serve as a hospital for sick and injured sea turtles. It will also serve as an educational facility. Visitors will have a chance to learn more about the rescue, rehabilitation and release of sea turtles. The South Carolina Aquarium opened 17 years ago. Since then, more than 200 sea turtle patients have passed through its doors. However, the aquarium didn't originally plan to become a turtle hospital. That idea came later. It happened after the unexpected arrival of a sick loggerhead turtle named Stinky. The turtle inspired the aquarium to open its Sea Turtle Care Center. The hospital is now South Carolina's main center for treating sick and injured sea turtles. The hospital has grown in size over the years. When it began, it was not very fancy. In place of tanks, there were kiddie pools. Now it's an advanced hospital equipped with the latest technology to help treat patients. However, it became clear over time that the hospital was outgrowing its facility. It would have to expand if it wanted to do more to involve the community with its mission to save sea turtles. ## New Tanks Big Enough To Hold A 300-Pound Turtle The new facility expands both the patient and visitor areas. The upgraded tanks nearly double the hospital's room for patients. It's also big enough now to house larger turtles, including adult loggerheads. These enormous sea creatures can weigh more than 300 pounds. The new tanks were designed with turtles' health in mind. That means they have special glass so that visitors can see in but turtles can't see out. The glass lets scientists observe the turtles from all angles. This limits the need for physical human interaction, which can be stressful for turtles. Kelly Thorvalson is the leader of the sea turtle rescue program. She says that animal experts helped the architects designing the new tanks. This was so that the tanks "would be best for our patients,” Thorvalson says. Each tank will be equipped with a tablet. Visitors will be able to "swipe through and learn about each patient's medical situation." The new facility also allows visitors to see into an operating room. There they can watch scientists working on patients. Turtle injuries can range from boating accidents to digesting plastic. ## Visitors Can Operate On A Virtual Turtle “We triage patients,” chief veterinarian Shane Boylan says. That means the scientists quickly study the turtles' injuries to decide the best way to treat them. "Nine times out of ten, we can save patients," Boylan says. In addition, the new facility features mock medical stations. The stations are equipped with augmented reality technology. It works by adding a computerized picture to what people see in the real world. The stations will allow visitors to study virtual sea turtles. They can even explore what it's like to treat a sea turtle patient. The system lets visitors perform operations and treat a virtual turtle. Finally, the new care center also features a classroom and theater. Videos will show a sea turtle's journey from being a patient to his or her return to the ocean. Educating people is important, Thorvalson says. "[The new facility] will allow us to educate guests in a more powerful and meaningful way."