Seahorse genome study sheds light on strange species Male pregnancy. A long, tube-shaped mouth with no teeth. A body covered with bony plates. These are the odd, but typical features of seahorses. But, why? Scientists think they have some answers. They recently published a study with the first complete sequence of a seahorse genome. A genome is a set of instructions that all living things have. Each genome has all the information needed for a living being to grow and develop. “We have discovered an array of changes in the genome, which helps to explain why the seahorse looks the way it does,” said Byrappa Venkatesh, a co-author of the study. He is a molecular biologist with the Agency for Science Technology and Research (A*STAR) in Singapore. Venkatesh and other scientists first sequenced the genome of tiger tail seahorses, whose scientific name is Hippocampus comes. Then, the scientists compared the seahorse traits to close relatives, like pipefish and seadragons. What they found explains many of the creature’s oddities. For instance, seahorses are missing “P/Q-rich SCPP” genes, which cause minerals to collect into teeth. Not having teeth may explain why seahorses have narrow, straw-like mouths. Another example involves the seahorse’s lack of pelvic fins, which provides their armor-like appearance. Seahorses are missing the gene tbx4, which is the gene that would tell a seahorse embryo, or an unborn baby, where to grow its pelvic fins. “We tested the effect of this loss by silencing this gene in a 'regular' fish (a zebrafish),” said Axel Meyer, who is also a co-author of the study. Meyer is an evolutionary biologist at the University of Konstanz in Germany. “This resulted in mutant zebrafish that lacked the pelvic fins," which demonstrates the effect of losing this gene. The team did not clarify the mystery of male seahorse pregnancy, which is also known as being ''gravid.'' Male seahorses hold fertilized eggs in a brood pouch until they hatch and the baby seahorses are born. The study found this pouch contains a large number of genes from a family known as astacin metalloproteases, which are responsible for egg hatching. But Kenyon Mobley, an evolutionary biologist at Lausanne University in Switzerland who wasn’t involved in this study, said there are still open questions about male seahorses. “The evolutionary transition from maternal care to paternal care is still unknown,” Mobley said. This means the genome alone doesn’t provide a step-by-step story for how seahorses switched from moms to dads caring for their babies. Mobley said it’s possible that male seahorses caring for their babies was a byproduct of losing another trait rather than a critical step in the seahorse evolution, the gradual changes in species over time. But, he said the study presents the most information on the seahorse genome so far. This is an important first step in uncovering the genetic base of a unique species that has existed for 13 million years. Meyer agreed: “We are learning a bit more with every study like this in an effort to understand the world around us…from genes to whole organisms.”