Seahorse genome study sheds light on strange species Seahorses are special for many reasons. They have long mouths, but no teeth. Their bodies are covered with bony plates. And, the dads have the babies. Why? We may have some answers. A team of scientists published a study on seahorses. The study has the first complete order of a seahorse genome. A genome is a set of directions that all living things have. This is how living beings grow and develop. The scientists discovered many changes in seahorses' genomes. This helps explain why the seahorse looks the way it does, said Byrappa Venkatesh. Venkatesh is a co-author of the study. The team of scientists first studied the genome of tiger tail seahorses. Then, they compared it to similar sea creatures like pipefish and seadragons. They found explanations for the seahorses' oddities. For instance, seahorses are missing the genes that cause teeth to form. Not having teeth may be why they have narrow, straw-like mouths. Also, the seahorse does not have the gene that would tell it to grow a pelvic fin. That's the fin a fish has underneath its body. It helps them to steer as they swim. Seahorses are missing pelvic fins. This gives them an armor-like appearance. But, the team still does not know why the dads have the babies. The male seahorses hold eggs in a pouch. They hold the eggs until they hatch and the baby seahorses are born. The study found this pouch helps the eggs hatch. But, no one knows for sure why the male seahorses care for the babies. Studying the genomes has not helped scientists learn why. It’s possible that dad seahorses care for their babies because they lost another feature. Or, it is possible that this has just been a gradual change that has taken place over many years. This is called evolution. Even though the scientists still don't have this answer, their study gives the most information on seahorses genomes so far. This is an important first step in uncovering even more information about seahorses, which have existed for 13 million years. “We are learning a bit more with every study like this," said Axel Meyer, who is one of the study's co-authors.