Seahorse genome study sheds light on strange species Seahorses have some pretty crazy features. They have long mouths, but no teeth. Their bodies are covered with bony plates. And, the males have the babies. Why? For a long time, no one knew for sure. Now, we may have some answers. A team of scientists recently published a study. It has the first complete order of a seahorse genome. A genome is a set of instructions that all living things have. Each genome has all the information needed for a living being to grow and develop. The scientists discovered many changes in seahorses' genomes. This helps explain why the seahorse looks the way it does, said Byrappa Venkatesh, a co-author of the study and a biologist in Singapore. The team of scientists first sequenced the genome of tiger tail seahorses. Then, they compared the seahorse features to close relatives, like pipefish and seadragons. What they found explains many of the creature’s oddities. For instance, seahorses are missing the genes that cause minerals to form teeth. Not having teeth may explain why seahorses have narrow, straw-like mouths. Also, the seahorse does not have the gene that would tell it where to grow pelvic fins. And because it is missing pelvic fins, it has an armor-like appearance. “We tested the effect of this loss by silencing this gene in a 'regular' fish (a zebrafish),” said Axel Meyer, who is also a co-author of the study and a biologist at the University of Konstanz in Germany. “This resulted in mutant zebrafish that lacked the pelvic fins," which demonstrates the effect of losing this gene. The team was not able to shed any light on why the males have the babies. Male seahorses hold fertilized eggs in a pouch until they hatch and the baby seahorses are born. The study found this pouch contains a large number of genes that are responsible for egg hatching. Kenyon Mobley is a biologist in Switzerland. Mobley wasn’t involved in this study, but says there are related questions. It is not known why over time female care of the babies switched to male care of the babies. The genome alone doesn’t provide a step-by-step story for this switch. Mobley said it’s possible that male seahorses care for their babies because they lost another feature. Another answer is that it's a step in seahorse evolution, which is the gradual change of a living being over many years. But, Mobley said the study presents the most information on the seahorse genome so far. This is an important first step in uncovering the genetic basics of a species that has existed for 13 million years. Meyer agreed: “We are learning a bit more with every study like this.”