Starving sea lion pups stranding SANTA ANA, Calif. — Sea lions live on the West Coast of the United States. Every year in June, sea lion mothers give birth to a pup. The mothers swim off to find food in the ocean. They return to give milk to their pups. Sea lions eat sardines and anchovies. These are their favorite fishes to eat. Last year, these fish were hard to find. Mothers had to swim farther to find food.  Hungry pups were left alone when their mothers took too long to return. They were starving. Their mothers did not have much food for them. El Nino is a weather event in the Pacific Ocean. It raises the temperature of the water. The ocean near California becomes warmer. Sardines and anchovies cannot live if the water is too warm. El Nino can make it hard for sea lions to find food. Fish, like sardines and anchovies, eat plankton. Plankton are a group of small sea animals. They need nitrogen and sunlight. The right wind can bring nitrogen from the deep ocean to the sunny surface. This is called upwelling. A warm patch of water near California is called “the blob." It can stop upwelling. El Nino and other weather events can also stop upwelling. Without upwelling, the plankton cannot live. Without plankton to eat, the fish cannot live. Without fish to eat, sea lions go hungry. Hungry pups are left alone and hungry in California. When weather events like El Nino happen, fewer mother sea lions give birth to pups. Three years ago, there were fewer sea lions, too. It was not El Nino season though. Something else was going on. The Earth is getting warmer. This event is called global warming or climate change. Global warming can make it harder for sea lions to find food.  There are care centers that help animals like sea lions. They help pups who are left alone. This year, they are ready for the many sea lions. The care centers feed the pups and put them back into the ocean. The people worry that the pups will have a difficult time in the wild though. There are just not enough fish in the ocean. Keith Matassa is in charge of the animal care center. “We’re not going to be able to save every sea lion," he says. ——— —Weight: 700 pounds for males; 240 pounds for females —Length: 7.5 feet for males; 6 feet for females —Lifespan: 20 to 30 years —Diet: Squid, anchovies, mackerel, rockfish and sardines —Range: Pacific Coast, from central Mexico to British Columbia —Protected: Marine Mammal Protection Act (1972)