Algae toxin harms sea lions' brains SAN JOSE, Calif. — Thousands of sea lions are being poisoned. The animals live along the coast of the Pacific Ocean. They are in the states of California, Oregon and Washington. The poison is making the sea lions very sick, and many are dying. The poison is caused by domoic acid. It is produced by an algae called pseudo-nitzschia. Algae is plant-like but without roots, stems and leaves. It is found in lakes, ponds and the ocean. Algae feeds fish, but when there is too much of it, algae can cause problems. In this case, the domoic acid in pseudo-nitzschia kills brain cells.  A team of scientists studied the algae. They found that the domoic acid causes brain damage in sea lions. The animals lose their memory and ability to find their way around. Over the last few years, scientists have seen more and more California sea lions struggle onto beaches weak, confused and trembling. “They have a lot of difficulty navigating and finding food. They have no sense of which way to go," says Peter Cook. He is a scientist and an expert on sea lions. Cook says about one-third of stranded sea lions suffer from domoic acid poisoning.  When algae multiplies very quickly in water it is called a bloom. Blooms of the poisonous algae usually happen for a few weeks in the spring. This year’s bloom was the largest ever recorded. It lasted all summer and stretched from California to Alaska.  The bloom also caused crab fishing to shut down in most of California. It is something that has never happened before. The poisonous algae also affects other sea animals. It works its way up the food chain. Razor clams and small fish eat the algae, and the sea lions eat them. Cook's team picked up 30 California sea lions from a marine center in California. Some of the animals suffered from poisoning, others were hurt or sick from something else. The scientists brought the animals to a lab at the University of California, Santa Cruz. Once there, scientists gave the sea lions tests. They led them on paths. Animals with healthy brains were able to understand the paths and adjust to any changes. Sea lions with poisoning could not adjust to the routes. Then the scientists hid buckets of fish from the sea lions. Those with poisoning could not remember where the fish were. Cook's team used special equipment to look at the brains of the poisoned sea lions. They found that part of the brain had shrunk. It was the part that the animals use for memory and to find their way around. Kathi Lefebvre works for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), a part of the government that protects the ocean. She says that brain damage is a big problem for an animal that has to search for food to survive. Lefebvre also says that sick sea lions have been found in Oregon and Washington. They used to only be in California. Lefebvre says what scientists find could also help people. Human cases of the poisoning are rare. However, there may be more if warming ocean temperatures continue to support poison blooms of algae. Almost 4,000 sea lions were brought into California animal centers this year. Justin Viezbicke also works for NOAA. He says that more sea lions likely died at sea. “There were a lot that we just couldn’t get to," he says. Sharon Melin is a scientist with the United States National Marine Fisheries Service. She says that healthy female sea lions are very focused. They will storm up the beach to interact and look for their pups. Melin says poisoned sea lions seem lost, confused and tired. Sea lion pups are also struggling, but they have a different problem. Their problem is caused by warm temperatures in the Pacific Ocean. Melin says that California sea lion pups are too thin. The pups weigh much less than they have in over 40 years. Melin says mother sea lions are not providing enough milk. They cannot make milk because they cannot find enough of the cold-water fish they typically eat.