Starving sea lion pups stranding SANTA ANA, Calif. — Every June, on the Channel Islands in California, sea lion mothers give birth to a pup. Mothers then swim off for days at a time looking for food. They return to provide milk for their pups.  Early in 2015, sardines and anchovies — the best food — were hard to find. The mothers dove deeper and swam farther for food. By the time they returned to their pups, they didn’t have much milk to offer. The ocean was emptier than before. There were not enough fish to eat. The pups wound up stranded on mainland beaches in record numbers, emaciated and starving. As El Nino hits California this year, worse is expected. Marine mammal care centers are preparing for a lot of strandings. Some scientists and ocean advocates warn that such a compassion-laden response cannot fix an oceanwide problem. The food shortage could last decades and may have been worsened by overfishing. Geoff Shester is the California campaign director for Oceana, an environmental group. “We treat them as sacred animals,” he said. “In the end, it’s shortsighted to believe you’re going to save the sea lions simply by rescuing them, rehabilitating them and then sending them out when there’s not really enough food to go around. “From a humane point of view, it makes sense, but it’s really only addressing the symptom rather than the root cause.” In a normal year, the Pacific Marine Mammal Center in Laguna Beach. California, will rehabilitate 100 to 120 sea lions. It may take in one that re-stranded after getting treated. In 2015, the center rescued a record-setting 534 sea lions, including more than two dozen that had re-stranded. The center is braced for even more this year. “That’s a high number, but it shows there’s something wrong out in the wild,” said Keith Matassa, the executive director at the mammal center. For the past 35 years, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) research scientist Mark Lowry has put together a yearly estimation of the sea lion population. The federal Marine Mammal Protection Act, which outlawed the killing, capture or harassment of all marine mammals, was passed in 1975\. Between 1978 and 2012, the pup population grew every year, to roughly 300,000 today.  Historically, El Nino events such as the one California is experiencing now caused pup production to plummet. But three years ago, something changed. It wasn’t an El Nino season, and births were very low. Something else was going on. “The ecosystem changed,” Lowry said. “Those poor animals are having a really hard time right now.” It’s what El Nino does to sea lions’ food supply — specifically the nutritious sardines and anchovies they prefer — that makes them suffer. The health of those fish populations is driven by climate, said Dave Checkley. He is an oceanography professor at Scripps Institution of Oceanography in California. Plankton, which are eaten by fish, need nitrogen and sunlight to survive. The right wind currents can bring nitrogen from the deep ocean to the sunny surface. This process is called upwelling. An unusually warm patch of water parked off the West Coast, known as “the blob," can prevent upwelling. El Nino or other events can also prevent it. Without upwelling, the plankton, fish and sea lions pay the price. In recent years, as ocean conditions have changed, the sardine and anchovy populations have collapsed. And fishing may be exacerbating the problem. Scientists agree that, overall, the sea lion population is far from crisis, and not even close to extinction. However, more than 3,300 animals were stranded along the California coast through the first five months of 2015\. That is seven times the average for those same months during the previous 10 years. The strandings this year already have started, like they did this time a year ago. Normally, sea lion pups shouldn’t leave the Channel Island rookeries until spring, and historically that’s the only time strandings occurred. Now, strandings seem to happen year-round. At the same time, Matassa recognizes that “we’re not going to be able to save every sea lion. … Some of them are going to be humanely euthanized if they don’t have a chance.” Nearby, a dozen sea lion pups clambered out of a pool as rain clouds poised to unleash a storm. The pups waddled, launched themselves and slid across the wet concrete, barking happily. —Weight: 700 pounds for males; 240 pounds for females —Length: 7.5 feet for males; 6 feet for females —Lifespan: 20 to 30 years —Diet: Squid, anchovies, mackerel, rockfish and sardines —Range: Pacific Coast, from central Mexico to British Columbia —Protected: Marine Mammal Protection Act (1972)