Algae toxin harms sea lions' brains SAN JOSE, Calif. — Sea lions are very sick. Some are dying. Many of the animals are being poisoned. The sea lions live by the coast of the Pacific Ocean. They are in the states of California, Oregon and Washington.   The poison is made by algae. Algae is like a water plant. It has no roots, stems or leaves. Too much algae can cause problems. The poison in this kind of algae hurts the brain in California sea lions. The animals cannot remember things. They also cannot find their way around. Scientists have seen many California sea lions crawl onto beaches. They are weak, confused and shaking. Peter Cook is a scientist. He says the sea lions cannot remember how to find food.  When water algae spreads very fast it is called a bloom. This year the bloom was the biggest ever. It lasted all summer and stretched from California to Alaska.  The bad algae works its way up the food chain. Clams and small fish eat the algae. Then sea lions eat the fish and clams.  Many sea lions were sick this year. Rescuers brought many of them to animal centers. Cook and other scientists picked up 30 California sea lions. Some of the animals suffered from poisoning. Others were hurt or sick from something else. The scientists brought the animals to a lab. Scientists gave the sea lions tests. They hid buckets of fish from them. Animals with healthy brains did well. Sea lions with poisoning could not remember how to find the buckets of fish. Cook's team looked at pictures of the brains of the poisoned sea lions. Part of the brain had shrunk. It was the part that the animals use to remember where to find food. They also use it to find their way around. Kathi Lefebvre is a scientist, too. She says that a hurt brain is a big problem for a sea lion. It has to search for food to live. Lefebvre says learning about the algae could help people, too. People eat seafood. The algae shut down fishing for crabs in most of California. If people eat poisoned crabs, they could get sick.  Sea lion babies, called pups, are also in trouble. The problem is caused by warm ocean water. Sea lions eat fish that live in cold water. When the water is warm, there is not enough food for mother sea lions. Mother sea lions cannot make milk without food. The pups are hungry and too thin.