Algae toxin harms sea lions' brains SAN JOSE, Calif. — Thousands of sea lions are getting sick or dying along the Pacific Coast of Northern California, Oregon and Washington. Now, scientists have found the culprit that is disrupting marine life, and it is microscopic.     The cause is a tiny toxin produced by marine algae known as pseudo-nitzschia. Algae is plant-like but lacks roots, stems and leaves. It is found in lakes, ponds and the ocean. It provides nutrition for fish, but when it becomes too abundant, algae can cause problems. In this case, the toxin in the algae, called domoic acid, kills brain cells. A team of scientists out of Santa Cruz, California, has found a relationship between brain damage and sea lions’ profound loss of memory and navigational skills.  In recent years, biologists have increasingly observed a high number of California sea lions struggle onto beaches, weak, confused and trembling. “They have a lot of difficulty navigating and finding food. They have no sense of which way to go," says Peter Cook, who presented the findings in San Francisco at the Conference on the Biology of Marine Mammals. The team's research is also published in the journal Science. Cook says an estimated one-third of stranded sea lions now suffer from domoic acid poisoning. Harmful algal blooms are not new. Blooms of the toxic algae usually occur in the spring and last just a few weeks. However, this year’s bloom was the largest ever recorded, lasting through the summer and extending from Santa Barbara, California, to Alaska.  The bloom also caused Dungeness and rock crab fisheries to shut down in most of California, which has never happened before. The toxin affects other marine life, too. It works its way up the food chain from razor clams to anchovies and other small fish to sea lions, one of the top predators in coastal waters. Kathi Lefebvre works for the Northwest Fisheries Science Center, part of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). She says for the first time ever, sick sea lions have been documented in Oregon and Washington, not just California. Using dog crates and a truck, Cook's team picked up 30 California sea lions undergoing veterinary care and rehabilitation at the Marine Mammal Center in Sausalito, California. Some sea lions suffered poisoning, others had infections or other physical ailments. The scientists brought the animals to a psychology lab at the University of California, Santa Cruz. Once there, the sea lions continued to heal and underwent behavioral tests using mazes and buckets of fish. Animals with healthy brains were able to quickly master the pattern of a maze and adjust to last-minute changes in the route. In contrast, animals with poisoning lacked the short-term memory to recall or adapt to the changed maze. Navigation is not the only brain function to be affected, the animals showed differences in long-term memory as well. Scientists hid buckets of fish, and the sea lions with domoic acid poisoning could not remember where to find them. Cook's team took pictures of the poisoned animals' brains using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). This technique forms detailed images of internal organs and tissue. The sea lions were put inside a scanner with large magnets, then radio waves were used to locate atoms in the brain tissue and create the images.  The results showed that the poisoned animals had a damaged and shrunken hippocampus, a region of the brain responsible for memory and navigation. The greater the damage, the worse their skills. The study, Lefebvre says, “Has very profound implications for an animal that to survive has to forage."  Lefebvre also says the study could also help identify humans poisoned by domoic acid. Human cases are rare but may rise if warming ocean temperatures continue to support toxic algal blooms. Lefebvre says, “If we continue to see increasing concentrations in the food web, we’re going to need to be more vigilant to protect human health."   More than 3,400 sea lions were brought into California rehabilitation facilities between January and June. Justin Viezbicke, the California stranding coordinator for NOAA fisheries, says the final tally will likely surpass 4,000 animals. Additional sea lions probably died out at sea. Viezbicke says, “There were a lot that we just couldn’t get to, once our facilities reached capacity.” Sharon Melin is a wildlife biologist with the U.S. National Marine Fisheries Service who specializes in sea lion health. When female sea lions are healthy, she says, they are very focused and can be seen storming up the beach to crawl, interact and look for their pups. In contrast, she says, poisoned animals look disoriented. “They look like they are relieved to be there and just lay down and rest," she says. "If they have seizures, you’ll notice their head kinked back and their flippers flapping up and down.” Sea lion pups are facing a different problem, caused by record-breaking warm temperatures in the Pacific Ocean. Melin’s research shows that California sea lion pups are abnormally thin. The pups weigh 31 percent below normal, the lowest average weight in 41 years of testing. A lack of food appears to be the main problem, as sardines, anchovies and other cold-water creatures are in short supply. Melin says that mother sea lions are not providing enough milk, and the pups are too young and weak to find food on their own. Melin says that the problem is unlikely to threaten the thriving population of California sea lions, estimated at 300,000 and growing. However, it is an indicator of challenging environmental conditions. She says the ecosystem is facing health issues caused by influences such as climate change, which could affect future generations.