The new pool will allow visitors to see the orcas from a viewpoint below the water line, as well as give them a birds-eye view. Still, one animal rights activist calls it just "a bigger prison." SAN DIEGO, Calif. — SeaWorld San Diego has faced heavy criticism recently over its treatment of orcas, the giant sea creatures popularly known as killer whales. On Friday, it announced several changes to improve the lives of its 10 killer whales. A documentary called "Blackfish" condemned SeaWorld's treatment of orcas. SeaWorld San Diego plans to double the size of its orca environment. It will also spend $10 million to study the species. Lastly, it will establish a committee of scientists to oversee its orca program. Called the Blue World Project, the new orca pool will be nearly double the size of the current one. It will cover 1.5 acres and will be 50 feet deep and 350 feet long. The new pool will allow visitors to see the orcas from a viewpoint below the water line. Described as the first of its kind, it will be completed by 2018. SeaWorld parks in Orlando, Florida, and San Antonio, Texas, will build similar pools. According to Jim Atchison, SeaWorld's president, the new pool will change "how visitors experience killer whales." It will provide views that are "up close and personal," he said. Visitors, Atchison said, will have a range of views available to them. They will be able to "walk alongside the whales as if they were at the shore." Or, they can "watch them interact at the depths found in the ocean," or, alternatively, enjoy "a birds-eye view from above.” The committee of scientists will aim to maximize the “health and well-being” of SeaWorld’s orcas. Its members will include experts in various scientific fields. The additional $10 million will support projects devoted to studying orcas in the wild. The new plans did not impress a main critic of SeaWorld’s orca program, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA). The animal rights group has called for the orcas to be put in large-scale ocean shelters. “This is a desperate drop-in-the-bucket move,” said PETA lawyer Jared Goodman. “A bigger prison is still a prison.” SeaWorld's announcement came at a time when the company is earning less money. Doubts have been raised over whether it can recover from the bad publicity sparked by the documentary. The Orlando-based company admitted for the first time that attendance at its theme parks has dropped. Ticket sales, it said, have been hurt by claims that the orcas are being mistreated. At SeaWorld San Diego, the orca show has long been the biggest attraction. Meanwhile, a law is being considered that would ban the park from breeding its orcas or using them for “entertainment.” SeaWorld officials insist the breeding program helps researchers study the orca birth cycle. It also, they said, “enriches the lives of our animals" by allowing them to "help raise another member of their pod.” SeaWorld San Diego attracts 4.4 million people a year. During the summer, the park employs 4,500 workers, making it a major San Diego employer. Despite the bad publicity, San Diego's leaders still strongly support SeaWorld. In addition to the jobs it creates, SeaWorld pays the city $14 million each year to rent its land. Earlier this year, the City Council voted to name March as SeaWorld Month to celebrate the park’s 50th anniversary. In a statement included with Friday’s announcement, City Council President Todd Gloria praised the changes. The new pool, he said, will improve "the experience for the animals, workers and visitors of the park.”