The new environment for the killer whales will cover 1.5 acres. It will be 50 feet deep and 350 feet long. But, says an animal rights activist, "A bigger prison is still a prison." SAN DIEGO, Calif. — Battered by controversy over its treatment of killer whales, SeaWorld San Diego announced Friday that it plans to double the size of its orca environment. It will also contribute an additional $10 million to research on the species. Lastly, it will establish an independent committee of scientists to oversee its orca program. "Blackfish," a documentary, criticized SeaWorld's treatment of the orcas. Called the Blue World Project, the new orca environment will be nearly double the size of the current pool. It will cover 1.5 acres and will be 50 feet deep and 350 feet in length. The new pool will allow visitors to see SeaWorld San Diego's 10 orcas from a viewpoint below the water line, SeaWorld officials said. The new space, described as the first of its kind, should be completed by 2018, officials said. SeaWorld parks at Orlando, Florida, and San Antonio, Texas, will follow with similar projects, officials said. “Through up close and personal encounters, the new environment will transform how visitors experience killer whales,” said Jim Atchison, SeaWorld's president. “Our guests will be able to walk alongside the whales as if they were at the shore, watch them interact at the depths found in the ocean, or a birds-eye view from above,” Atchison added. The goal of the committee of scientists is to maximize the “health and well-being” of SeaWorld’s orcas. Its members will include experts in various fields: an emeritus professor at the University of California-Davis veterinary school, a researcher at UC-Santa Cruz, a physiologist at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla, California, and others. The additional $10 million will support projects examining the hearing, reproduction and nutrition of orcas in the wild. The new plans did not impress a main critic of SeaWorld’s orca program, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA). The animal rights group has called for the orcas to be put in large-scale ocean sanctuaries. “This is a desperate drop-in-the-bucket move to try to turn back the clock at a time when people understand the suffering of captive orcas, and it will not save the company,” said PETA lawyer Jared Goodman. “A bigger prison is still a prison.” The announcement was also clearly meant to influence both the public and Wall Street. The announcement came during a week in which SeaWorld’s economic picture took a nosedive. Doubts have been raised over whether it can recover from the controversy sparked by “Blackfish,” which condemned the parks’ treatment of orcas. The Orlando-based company admitted for the first time that attendance at its theme parks has dropped. Ticket sales, it said, have been hurt by negative publicity caused by a drumbeat from animal rights activists about the alleged maltreatment of the killer whales. At SeaWorld San Diego, the orca show at Shamu Stadium has long been the marquee attraction. SeaWorld reported 6.6 million visitors at its various parks in the April-to-June period, nearly the same number as during April-to-June 2013. The company earned $37 million, after expenses, during the period, but it was much less than experts had expected. Sales fell 1 percent to $405.2 million. Meanwhile, Assemblyman Richard Bloom of Santa Monica has introduced a bill that would ban the park from breeding its orcas or using them for “entertainment.” The bill is on hold, until further study can be done. SeaWorld officials insist the breeding program helps researchers study orca reproduction. It also, they said, “enriches the lives of our animals by allowing them to experience, interact with and help raise another member of their pod.” SeaWorld San Diego attracts 4.4 million people a year. During the summer, the park employs 4,500 workers, putting it with Qualcomm, Northrop-Grumman and the Navy as major San Diego employers. Despite the controversy, San Diego politicians strongly support SeaWorld. Each year, SeaWorld pays the city $14 million to rent the land it sits on. Earlier this year, the City Council voted to proclaim March as SeaWorld Month to celebrate the park’s 50th anniversary. In a statement included with Friday’s announcement, City Council President Todd Gloria said he is “grateful to SeaWorld for the investment in these new facilities. The changes they’re announcing today will enhance the experience for the animals, workers and visitors of the park.”