SeaWorld will keep fewer dolphins ORLANDO, Fla. — Amidst the rides at SeaWorld's Aquatica water park in Orlando, there are four unusual creatures: Commerson’s dolphins, known for swimming upside down and their black and white markings that make them look like mini-killer whales. They likely will be the last of their kind in the United States. SeaWorld Entertainment’s collection has dwindled over the years, and the company doesn’t plan to breed or replace the aging dolphins. “Once these animals … go away, that’s going to be it for the species for the SeaWorld parks,” said Brad Andrews, the chief zoological officer. It’s “kind of sad, in a way, because people will never be able to see them anymore.” After years apart, SeaWorld recently brought together a group from its San Diego park with two others at Aquatica in Orlando. It was a bittersweet reunion. One died a week after making the trip. There are a few others in captivity in Japan, but importing them appears tough. Commerson’s dolphins are still found in the waters of the Southern Hemisphere, but SeaWorld recently pledged not to take whales or dolphins captured after early 2014. Animal advocates say SeaWorld, which has faced controversy over captive whales, will likely have to eventually stop exhibiting other types of animals as replacing them becomes too hard. After its last polar bear died in 2014, SeaWorld Orlando did not replace him, citing difficulties of obtaining more. SeaWorld also recently abandoned a controversial bid to import beluga whales caught in Russia a few years ago, though the company says there are still opportunities for breeding those already in captivity. SeaWorld says it has had more success breeding other animals. With the Commerson’s dolphins, though, “when you start with 12, there’s not enough genetic diversity,” Andrews said. With an estimated life span of less than 20 years, “they don’t live very long,” Andrews added. “That sort of stopped the program.” Critics say the dolphins’ lives demonstrate the problems of captivity. “It’s a depressing story,” said Nick Atwood, campaign coordinator for Animal Rights Foundation of Florida. SeaWorld, meanwhile, sees the dolphins as ambassadors who have taught visitors and scientists about their friends in the wild. Andrews noted that SeaWorld has published scientific papers after studying everything from their behavior to blood. In 1983, SeaWorld started with a dozen from the wild. Biologists wanted SeaWorld to study the dolphins, which were threatened by fishermen who caught them to use as crab bait. Six died in 1983 and 1984, federal records show, and there were 14 births through 2001 of Commerson’s dolphins that lived more than a month. The dolphins moved from place to place. Some went to SeaWorld in Ohio before it closed but mostly they lived in San Diego. Four came to Orlando when Aquatica opened in 2008. They can be seen from above-ground and underwater viewing areas and a lazy river. Also, a clear water-slide tube runs through their 228,000-gallon habitat, or dwelling. “It’s sort of like having a chimpanzee exhibit with a chute through it and periodically having people run through the chimpanzee enclosure. How is that even remotely reasonable?” said Naomi Rose, a marine mammal scientist. “The animals don’t care, put it that way,” Andrews said. “They got used to it very quickly. … We just thought it would be a neat opportunity, a very nice habitat for them to have this space.” In 2014, two Orlando dolphins — one 15 years old, one 20 — died of hepatic necrosis, or liver failure, within a little more than three months. In San Diego, the others were in an exhibit at the Journey to Atlantis ride. SeaWorld later brought in schooling fish, and the three displaced dolphins went to behind-the-scenes pools in 2011. At one point, they moved in with beluga whales. One beluga exhibited dominant behavior and blocked their new companions’ paths, so the dolphins had to go. SeaWorld wanted to move the dolphins to Aquatica three years ago, said Chris Dold, SeaWorld Entertainment’s vice president of veterinary services, but a blood infection in one and schedule conflicts caused delays. One of the original captured dolphins, 33-year-old Betsy, started eating irregularly after arriving in Orlando last month and quickly died. Betsy appeared healthy in assessments before the trip, Dold said, and another dolphin around the same age has done fine. Critics have questioned why the animals were moved, particularly the elderly ones. “I think it points to how zoos and aquariums often treat animals as kind of playing cards they can kind of shuffle around,” said Atwood, of the animal rights group. SeaWorld said it wanted to reunite the dolphins in a place people could connect with them. Animals go through a lengthy process to get them used to travel, Dold said. Whether the stress of the trip contributed to Betsy’s death is “the obvious question we’re still asking ourselves at this point,” Dold said. Shannon Cremeans, director of the nonprofit group Ceta-Base, which tracks captive dolphins, thinks SeaWorld has generally done the best it could. She said it “is both interesting and impressive that SeaWorld has maintained the species for over 30 years based on a small founding group of animals, especially taking into consideration how little was known about caring for this species at the time.”