SeaWorld in debate on whales' fate SAN DIEGO, Calif. — Animal rights activists applauded SeaWorld's plans to end its orca shows at its San Diego park. However, they said the company also should phase out keeping the killer whales in captivity. SeaWorld Entertainment Inc. announced Monday that it will stop orca shows at its San Diego park. Visitors at the tourist attraction made it clear they prefer seeing killer whales act naturally rather than doing tricks. CEO Joel Manby told investors the park will offer a different kind of orca experience, starting in 2017, which will focus on the animal's natural setting and behaviors. The iconic "Shamu" show featuring killer whales doing flips and other stunts debuted decades ago at the San Diego park. Representative Adam Schiff of California plans to introduce federal legislation to end breeding orcas in captivity. He said ending the shows is a good first step but doesn't go far enough. "The fact still remains that as long as SeaWorld holds orcas in captivity, the physical and psychological problems associated with their captivity will persist," he said. The Orlando, Florida-based company has seen revenue drop since the 2013 release of the documentary "Blackfish" that examined how orcas respond to captivity. It chronicles the case of Tilikum, the killer whale that caused the death of trainer Dawn Brancheau in 2010 by pulling her into a pool at SeaWorld Orlando. Attendance has dropped the most at the San Diego location. The decision to end orca shows will be limited for now to San Diego, the original home of Shamu, its first orca. The shows will continue at the other two SeaWorld parks in Orlando and in San Antonio, Texas. The killer whale shows at the Shamu stadium in San Diego were the park's main attraction in the 1970s and helped build SeaWorld as a top tourist spot. Trainers would ride the whales in the giant pool. Then they would get out and signal for the orcas to slap their tails in the water to splash spectators in a "splash zone." After Brancheau's death, trainers stopped going in the water during the shows, but they continued to swim with the killer whales while training them. Manby told investors Monday that California customers want to see more natural shows, so the new attraction will send a strong conservation message. "They want the orca experience to be activities the whales do in the wild," Manby said. "Things they perceive as tricks, they don't like as well." However, that's not "universal across our properties," he added. The news came days after SeaWorld Entertainment Inc. reported that its earnings in the third quarter of the year were lower than expected. SeaWorld earlier this year announced plans for a $100 million expansion of the killer whale tanks in San Diego, which it hopes will boost attendance. The project is called Blue World. But the California Coastal Commission said it would approve the project only if SeaWorld agreed not to breed, transfer or sell any of its captive orcas at the park. Manby called the commission's decision — which SeaWorld plans to fight in court — a bad precedent not only for SeaWorld but for all zoos and aquariums. He indicated to investors that the company might cancel the San Diego project. "We certainly know with the regulatory environment out there that happened with orcas, and some of what happened in California," Manby said. "With the reputation out there, I think we would be foolish if we didn't look at other options." He announced that the company is considering adding hotels at its parks, starting with San Diego, to attract overnight visitors. SeaWorld has reached an agreement with a hotel developer to begin exploring the possibility.