Scientists tell ABC’s "Four Corners" that nets are not effective barriers and that a bigger shark population does not increase attacks. Many beaches are protected by shark nets. According to new research, however, the nets might not be doing much. Shark nets are large nets placed underwater. They are positioned near beaches and designed to trap sharks before they get close to swimmers. Laurie Laurenson from Australia's Deakin University reviewed information on shark attacks from the past 50 years. He concluded that shark nets are not effective. He presented his findings on ABC’s "Four Corners" program recently. ## It's The Unlucky Shark That Gets Snared Laurenson was not alone. Shark expert Barry Bruce agreed that the nets are not particularly useful. They are too small to trap many sharks, he explained.  He said that nets are only a few hundred meters long. (One meter is just under one yard in length). Sometimes there are only two nets protecting beaches that are several kilometers long. (One kilometer equals just over 1/2 mile). Sharks can also easily swim over the nets. "They are set at a depth offshore where they don’t reach to the surface so they only come up 6 meters or so from the bottom in 10 meters of water," he said. "You have to be an unlucky shark to get caught,” he said. Bruce noted that nets at Bondi Beach in Sydney, Australia, had caught sharks before. However, he said that this did not mean the nets had prevented shark attacks. The type of sharks caught in the nets would not necessarily have attacked anyone. ## Fewer Sharks, Fewer Attacks? Not So The fact that shark nets kill sharks might be seen as an indirect way of preventing attacks. The nets reduce the shark population, leaving fewer sharks in the water. As the shark population goes down, the number of attacks would go down too. Or so you would think. Oddly, Laurenson found that this assumption turns out not to be true. “I can show statistically that there is no relationship between the number of sharks out there and the number of attacks,” Laurenson said on ABC. “It’s just simply not there. I don’t know. I’m surprised that it’s not there but it’s not there.” Laurenson said that shark nets probably do not make people safer simply by reducing the number of sharks. The same goes for drum lines, which are traps used to attract and capture sharks. ## Netted Beach Controversy In a three-month period in 2014, drum lines in Western Australia caught 172 sharks. The majority were tiger sharks. According to ABC, tiger sharks had not killed anyone in Western Australia for more than 20 years. Natalie Banks works at Sea Shepherd Australia, a group dedicated to protecting ocean wildlife. She appeared on "Four Corners" along with Laurenson. She pointed out that shark nets do not just trap sharks. They also harm other sea creatures. She said she and her coworkers had seen dolphins, turtles and stingrays dying in shark nets. Some people are still in favor of using shark nets. Vic Paddemors, a shark scientist working for the government, said that although they could not prove statistically that shark nets had prevented attacks, he believed they had. “Without a question of a doubt I can definitely put my hand on my heart and say that I believe that shark nets work and I believe that you are a lot safer at a netted beach,” he said. Rick Fletcher, a spokesperson for the Western Australia Department of Fisheries noted that during the drum-line program in the state, nobody was attacked. He said that this was a sign that the program might be helping. ## Unprovoked Attacks On The Rise Laurenson's research suggested that the size of the shark population might not have very much to do with the number of shark attacks, however. Instead, he found a clear link between attacks and the size of the human population.  John West from Taronga Conservation Society has been studying sharks in Australia for years. Like Laurenson, he has found that increases in human population are linked to more shark attacks. West found that between 1995 and 2004, there was an average of 9.6 unprovoked shark attacks a year in Australia. In the following 10 years, that increased to 12.3 attacks per year. Meanwhile, Australia’s population increased from about 17 million to more that 23 million, with most of that increase concentrated on the coast.