This camera sees what sharks see. Catsharks are not harmful to humans. They also do not look very cool to people. Catsharks are a muddy brown color in sunlight. These sharks do not get a lot of sun. They live deep in the ocean. Catsharks look really cool down in the ocean. They give off a green light. Scientists could not see that green light until now. Scientists made a special camera. It mimics catshark eyes.   Scientists can now see the glowing green catsharks. They wrote about the glowing catsharks in a magazine for scientists. John Sparks is a scientist. Sparks studied the glowing green catsharks. These sharks live really deep in the ocean. Sunlight cannot travel all the way down to the catsharks.  Sunlight has many different colors of light. Sunlight has red, yellow, green and blue light. Plants can take in the red, yellow and blue light. Plants cannot suck up the green light. The green light bounces off plants and hits people's eyes. That is why plants look green. Red apples can take in yellow, blue and green light. Red apples cannot take in red light. Red light bounces off the apple and hits people's eyes. That is why apples look red.  The ocean takes in the red, yellow and green light really well. The ocean cannot take in blue light. That is why the ocean appears blue to us. The ocean is full of blue light.  Catsharks' skin can take in the blue light. It is easier to give off a green light than a blue light. So their skin changes the blue light to green. Their skin shines with a green light. This is called biofluorescence.  Sparks wants to understand why catsharks shine green. Sparks thinks that by glowing, catsharks can see each other more easily. "Imagine being at a disco party with only blue lighting, so everything looks blue," said David Gruber. He is a scientist who studies the catsharks. Imagine someone jumps on the dance floor with a glowing green suit, Gruber said. "That's what these sharks are doing," he said. It makes them really stand out. Gruber says the sharks use their glowing patterns to find each other. Chain catsharks and swell sharks have different green patterns. Boy catsharks and girl catsharks also have different green patterns. Gruber wants to study biofluorescence more. He found the first biofluorescent sea turtle. He wants to make more cameras that help scientists see the world through the eyes of other animals.