Water temps and waste affect sharks Warmer waters and abundant food is making the California coast much more inviting to sharks than it normally is this time of year. In Southern California, great white sharks have begun to arrive after spending the winter off Baja California, on Mexico's Pacific coast.  Recently, one of those sharks bit a chunk out of a mother’s leg as she swam off San Onofre State Beach in San Diego, California. The woman, 35-year-old Leanne Ericson of Vista, remains in critical condition. “We are grateful for all of the concern, prayers and good wishes we have received in recent days from the many friends and strangers who have reached out to us from across the country, and indeed, the world,” read a statement from Ericson’s family. Chris Lowe is a biology professor and director of the Shark Lab at California State University, Long Beach. He said the shark that attacked Ericson on Saturday was likely not a full-grown adult. It probably mistook her for food. Typically, young great whites will feed on fish and rays. Rays are flat, bony sea creatures with long tails they can use to wound an enemy or inject poison into it.  Lowe said the young sharks have to learn how to find food on their own. “They don’t know how to chase down big prey.”   Adult great whites feed on sea lions and other marine life off islands such as Catalina and San Nicholas, Lowe said. Although it’s not exactly known where the mother sharks give birth, their babies immediately head toward the shore once they’re born. The sharks are normally off Southern California’s shores between May and October. But last year, warm waters triggered by El Niño kept the sharks in California longer into the winter. They came back earlier in the spring this year as well. Normally, trade winds blow from east to west in the winter across the waters of the Pacific, causing an upwelling in the ocean. Cold water is churned up from deep parts of the ocean toward the surface. During an El Niño year, however, the trade winds slow, or collapse entirely. This stops the usual rise of cold water. As a result, the ocean waters are warmer.  Some of the 2- and 3-year-old sharks are here earlier again this year, even without El Niño, Lowe said. He’s not sure why. “Maybe it just wasn’t cold enough to move those migrations. We just don’t know what’s going on this year,” Lowe said. But that’s not the only shark mystery this year. In the San Francisco Bay Area in Northern California, a huge number of leopard sharks and bat rays have been dying. This has sparked concerns among marine life experts. Leopard sharks are large, slender sharks with spotted markings which live in fairly shallow waters near the coast. Bat rays are large, flat sea creatures with venomous spines.  For weeks now, dead leopard sharks — newborns and mature adults — have been washing up on beaches all over Northern California. Officials with the Pelagic Shark Research Foundation in Monterey believe years of garbage and chemical waste jammed up in Bay Area storm drains and waterways. The waste has finally been washed into the bay as a result of this winter’s extremely heavy storms. The trash and chemicals are killing the creatures that live there. Man-made tide gates inside the bay close during high tide to prevent flooding during storms. These gates can also trap sharks and bat rays in the bay. At that point they are exposed to, and unable to escape, toxic runoff. At the peak of the die-off, dozens of dead sharks were found daily along the coastline, the foundation said. The number of dead sharks has begun to drop in the last week. Still, the die-off is puzzling given the fact that the shark population is thriving in Southern California.  On Thursday, Orange County Sheriff’s Sgt. Steve Marble said deputies with the harbor patrol in Dana Point spotted a group of four 6- to 8-foot great whites near the Southern California beach. ![Scientists are not sure why great white sharks got to California early this year. Image: Newsela Staff. [click to expand]](https://media.newsela.com/article_media/extra/sharks.jpg) “We’ve learned that these baby white sharks are temperature-sensitive and they don’t like temperatures above 80 degrees," Lowe said. They have this sweet spot, and Southern California is the perfect place from late spring to mid-fall,” Lowe said. “Then Baja becomes the sweet spot.” Despite the public panic a shark attack can create, Lowe says the coastline is safe if you look at the facts. When young sharks have attacked, it has typically been when swimmers have been alone, farther out in the water.  “It’s horribly unfortunate these things happen, but the reality is people are going to go out surfing and it’s not something that happens every day,” he said. Lowe says when a shark attacks a human, it's an accident. There's no evidence that sharks are purposely hunting people to eat.  “Otherwise, Huntington Beach would be a one-stop shop for sharks in the Pacific,” he joked.