A battle of shark counts will help decide if the fish gets protected off California's coast. How many great white sharks swim near California? It is a mystery. Some scientists say that there are a lot of sharks. Others say that there are way too few. Nobody knows for sure. But the question has become very important. Officials are deciding whether the sharks are an [endangered species](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species). That means the sharks would have to be protected, no matter what it would cost. This could wipe out a type of fishing business in the area. Sharks accidentally get caught in the fishing nets. “This is a tough one," California fish and wildlife official Adrianna Shea said. This is because scientists are divided on the issue. Great white sharks eat at the top of the food chain. That means they eat animals that eat other animals. Few creatures are as scary as the sharks. They can grow 21 feet long and weigh 3-1/2 tons. They hunt near where people surf and swim. Last year, environmental groups asked that the fish be named an endangered species. The groups did this after the first count of the sharks came out in 2011. Scientists said that only 219 great whites lived off the Central California coast. Their count is called a census. Other scientists disagree with the number. The scientists do not actually count each shark. From 2006 to 2008 they watched sharks that meet off the San Francisco coast from late July until late January. How did they get sharks to come close? They attracted great whites near their boat by slowly pulling a fake seal. They picked out individual sharks by the marks on their fins. They made some scientific guesses about how the sharks got together. Then they used math to come up with an estimate of the number of sharks. “It’s a lot easier counting elephants and lions,” Barbara Block, one of the authors, said. She was comparing the shark census to counting animals in Africa. “But we’re not off the mark by 2,000 sharks.” Michael L. Domeier is a shark expert. He has studied sharks for a long time. He thinks the shark count is much too low. Other scientists are about finished with a separate count. It will show that there are more than 2,000 adult and younger white sharks off Central California. Chris Lowe is a scientist who has been researching white sharks since 2002. On a recent weekday, Lowe watched as fishermen at a Manhattan Beach Pier tried to catch some fish. Lowe has equipment under the pier that listens for signals from sharks. “The potential for catching a great white shark off this pier is pretty good,” he said. Eric Martin works at the aquarium at the end of the pier. He remembered a day last July when a fisherman got a white shark on his hook. Martin told him that it was illegal to catch the fish. But the fisherman would not let it go. Martin cut the line with a knife. “I have a new strategy for dealing with fishermen and white sharks,” Martin said with a smile. “I let the fisherman fight it as long as he wants. When the shark gets close, I take a picture of it and the fisherman. Then I urge him to let it go.” After that, Martin makes prints of the photos and gives them to the fisherman as souvenirs.