The bay's waters have gotten healthier, and millions of fish, crabs and clams are living there now. And the leopard sharks are coming to the bay for some easy take-out food. SAN JOSE, Calif. — There are sharks in San Francisco Bay! But don't be scared. It's a good thing. Leopard sharks are making a home for themselves in the bay. The sharks' presence is proof that the bay is getting healthier. Leopard sharks have silvery skin with dark spots. They can be as big as 6 feet long. No two leopard sharks have the same spots, just like no two people have the same fingerprints. And they're harmless. Great white sharks have eaten people. Leopard sharks do not. “They have very tiny teeth. It’s like sandpaper,” said biologist Jim Hobbs. “At most, they might give you a scrape.” In 2003 the government spent $100 million to buy 15,100 acres of salt ponds from a company called Cargill. For many years Cargill produced salt from the ponds. The salt was used for food, medicine and to melt ice on roads. The ponds were so salty that almost nothing lived in them. Now ducks, birds and fish are living in the old salt ponds. That's because the salt ponds have been turned into tidal marshes. A tidal marsh is any swampy land that is covered and uncovered every day by the tide. Water now reaches more than four miles of old salt ponds. That allows millions of fish, worms and other species to live there. The leopard sharks swim into the old ponds and eat the other animals. There’s so much food that sometimes leopard sharks just sit at the marsh openings. When the water rushes out, so do all the fish, crabs and worms. Those are the foods that leopard sharks like to eat. They just have to open their mouths. “It’s pretty much a buffet tray for them,” said Hobbs. No one knows how many leopard sharks are in San Francisco Bay. But there seem to be a lot. Hobbs said that on some days, scientists catch and release as many as 30 leopard sharks in one hour. Scientists catch the sharks in nets. They want to see what they eat when they swim into the old salt ponds. But they do not cut open their stomachs. Instead, they put a nozzle in the sharks’ mouths. Scientists then spray water into the sharks' stomachs. The water makes the sharks throw up. The scientists collect what is in the sharks' stomachs. Then they return the fish to the water. “It doesn’t hurt them,” Hobbs said. “We throw them back within two or three minutes, they swim away, and they start eating again.” Researchers save the thrown-up shark food to figure out what the leopard sharks are eating. Eric Mruz, who works to protect wildlife, said that leopard sharks coming back to the area means the water is getting better. "It tells us the South Bay is getting healthier," he said. Most people don’t realize that sharks live in San Francisco Bay, said Christina Slager. She works at an aquarium in the area. But there are four shark species commonly found in the bay. They are leopard, spiny dogfish, brown smooth hound and sevengill sharks. None of them eat people. Leopard sharks aren’t [endangered](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species), Slager said. But they face threats like fishermen and pollution. They never get the attention great white sharks get. “If Steven Spielberg would do a movie about leopard sharks, that would be wonderful,” Slager said. But that would hardly be a scary movie like "Jaws." “They are delightful," Slager said. "They have beautiful patterns. And they are a pleasure to work with.” 