An argument over shark counts off California's coast will help decide the beasts' status. It’s a mystery of the sea: How many great white sharks are near California’s coast? Some scientists say the population is large and healthy. Others say it is alarmingly small. Nobody is certain. But the question has become very important. Authorities are deciding whether to call the fish an [endangered species](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species). That would mean the sharks have to be saved at all costs. This could wipe out a fishing industry that accidentally catches great whites. They get stuck in nets called "gill nets." “This is a tough one," California fish and wildlife official Adrianna Shea said. She noted that scientists are divided on the issue. Great white sharks are at the top of the food chain in the sea. Few creatures possess the fearsome image of the great white. It can can reach 21 feet and weigh 3-1/2 tons. It hunts near waters shared by surfers, scuba divers and swimmers. Officials have been studying the health of the great white since last year. That is when three environmental groups asked that the fish be named an endangered species. The groups did this after the first count of the sharks came out in 2011. Scientists estimated that only 219 great whites lived off the Central California coast. Their count is called a census. Other shark experts say the population is several times larger. Laws against pollution and against certain fishing near the shore have protected the sharks. From 2006 to 2008, the researchers watched sharks that gather off the San Francisco coast from late July until late January. They attracted great whites close to their boat by slowly pulling a fake seal. They identified 131 individual sharks by the marks on their fins. Then they used math to calculate the likely number of sharks. “It’s a lot easier counting elephants and lions,” Barbara Block, one of the authors, said. She was referring to animal counts in Africa. “But we’re not off the mark by 2,000 sharks.” Shark expert Michael L. Domeier disagrees with the count. His long-term study of white sharks suggests the actual population is much larger. Adult females do not always visit the coastal gathering sites. Also, younger white sharks are spread out over a much larger geographic area than adults, he said. Other scientists are about done with a separate count. It will show that there are more than 2,000 adult and younger white sharks off Central California. Chris Lowe is a scientist who has been researching white sharks since 2002. On a recent weekday, Lowe watched as fishermen at a Manhattan Beach Pier tried to catch halibut and other fish. “The potential for catching a great white shark off this pier is pretty good,” he said. Eric Martin, of the Roundhouse Aquarium at the end of the pier, remembered a day last July when a fisherman hooked a great white. Martin explained that it was illegal to land the fish, but the fisherman refused to let it go. Martin cut the line with a knife. Until that day, four white sharks had been caught off the pier since 1980. Last year alone, anglers hooked four juvenile white sharks. A 7-footer was caught and released three weeks ago. “I have a new strategy for dealing with fishermen and white sharks,” Martin said with a smile. “I let the fisherman fight it as long as he wants. When the shark gets close, I take a picture of it and the fisherman. Then I urge him to let it go.” After that, Martin makes prints of the photos and gives them to the fisherman as souvenirs.