Scientists ask: Why do sharks glow in the dark? Catsharks are not harmful to humans. They also are not much to look at in bright daylight. Their skin appears muddy brown. Catsharks do not see a lot of daylight because they live deep in the ocean. Down there, certain catsharks give off a green glow. Scientists can now see this glow with a special camera that mimics catshark vision.   With the camera, scientists see the glowing catsharks as they see themselves. The scientists think the glow becomes stronger as the sharks swim deeper. They published their ideas in a magazine for scientists. John Sparks, one of the scientists on this project, works at the American Museum of Natural History. Sparks and his team study the chain catshark and the swell shark. Not many scientists have studied these sharks. The two species of sharks live 2,000 feet below the surface of the ocean.  Sunlight has trouble traveling all the way to catshark territory. Sunlight has many wavelengths. Each wavelength is a color like red, yellow, green and blue. Plants are green because they absorb the red, yellow and blue sunlight. They cannot absorb green so the green light reflects back. The ocean absorbs the red, yellow and green in sunlight really well. It does not absorb blue wavelengths well. That is why the ocean appears blue. It is full of blue light. Catsharks live so deep in the ocean that it is completely blue.  Catsharks' skin can absorb some of the blue light. Their skin changes the blue light and turns it into green light. Their skin then radiates with a green glow. This is called biofluorescence. This is different from bioluminescence. With bioluminescence, the animal produces light with its own body. Fireflies making their butts glow is an example of bioluminescence.  Sparks and his team had seen catsharks glowing, or biofluorescing, a few years ago. Now Sparks and his team are hoping to understand why catsharks are biofluorescent. Sparks thinks that glowing makes it easier for catsharks to see each in the blue light of the deep ocean.  It is hard for humans to understand what a bioluminescent deep-sea creature is supposed to look like. Their colorful glowing is not made for human eyes. The catsharks can only see green and blue colors. Humans can see more colors so the glow is not as strong.  With the special fishy camera, the scientists could suddenly see the glowing green catsharks like a real catshark. The scientists could not find all the catsharks because they live too deep in the ocean. The scientists could dive only to the most shallow regions of the sharks' territory. To imagine what would happen even deeper in the ocean, they used math models. The scientists think that water gets bluer deeper in the ocean and the sharks glow stronger. "Imagine being at a disco party with only blue lighting, so everything looks blue," said David Gruber. He is a scientist at the American Museum of Natural History. Imagine someone jumps on the dance floor with a glowing green suit, Gruber said. "They would stand out like a sore thumb. That's what these sharks are doing." Gruber believes the sharks use their glowing patterns to spot and identify each other. The chain catshark and swell shark have different green patterns. A male catshark had a different green pattern than a female catshark. Gruber said the same thing happened when scientists discovered how to record and listen to bats. "They discovered all this hidden chatter. They had to then figure out what it meant," he added. There is more work to do before the scientists can be sure that the sharks' glow is stronger in deeper water. Christine Bedore is a scientist who disagrees with Sparks. She said she did not think the biofluorescence was that important. Gruber wants to study biofluorescence more. Last year, he found evidence of the first biofluorescent reptile, a sea turtle, and he is eager to make more animal-eye cameras to help scientists understand how other creatures experience the world in which they live.