Whale shark DNA tells a story. Whale sharks are the largest fish in the ocean. They can be as big as a bus. Their size doesn't make them easier to study, though. In the past, scientists have tried a few different ways. They spy on the sharks from up in the air. They put tags on the sharks. Then they track them on computers. Sometimes scientists even sneak up on sharks. They take samples of their skin to study. Now there may be an easier way. A group of scientists studied the water sharks swim through. The water has important information about the sharks. The information is in shark DNA. All people and animals have DNA. It is the basic building blocks of life. It tells bodies how to look, grow and work. DNA is passed from parents to their children. It tells us how groups of animals are related. Water can hold DNA too. DNA passes into water through skin cells, blood or waste. The scientists studied the DNA the sharks left in the water. The scientists looked at a group of about 200 whale sharks. They used 20 samples of water to learn about them. They studied the DNA. It told them a lot.  They learned that the sharks had relatives. The sharks were related to sharks from the Indian and Pacific Oceans. They were not as closely related to Atlantic Ocean sharks. The water was taken from 15 different places in the Persian Gulf. This is a body of water in Western Asia. The whale sharks had been spotted there. Most of the samples were very small. The scientists then used machines to study the DNA. The scientists also had DNA from whale shark bodies. This DNA was from other sharks who swam in Persian Gulf. The scientists found this DNA had similar information to tell. This let them know their study was working, not wrong. The scientists used the DNA to guess the number of mothers in the group of sharks. This could predict shark population size. That's the number of sharks in a group. First, they guessed based on the seawater DNA. Then they guessed based on the shark body DNA. The answers were different. Still, they were pretty close. The scientists said seawater DNA was a good way to find out how many mothers there are. Others have studied DNA in water before. Yet the scientists said this was different. This study shows something new. It says DNA found in water can tell us important things about how animals are related.