California coast visitors are now 91 percent less likely to be bitten by a great white shark than they were in 1950, likely because beach populations of humans have risen dramatically More people are being bitten by sharks than ever before. Yet, you are not more likely to be bitten by a shark. Your chances of being bitten are dropping. They are lower than ever. How can both things be true? The answer is simple. There are many more people in the water these days. A new study found the answer. The new study looks only at California. What it found is probably true for the whole world, though. California beachgoers are much safer now. People are much less likely to be bitten than they were in 1950. Still, more people are getting bitten by sharks. In the 1950s, there was about one shark attack a year in California. Now shark bites happen a little more often than once a year. Since the 2000s there have been about three attacks over every two years. The chance of being bitten by a shark is very small. Having more people in the water changes things, though. It makes it more likely that someone will be bitten. In California, there are a whole lot more people in the water. There are now around 125 times as many surfers as there were in 1950. Back in 1950, there were about 7,000 surfers. In 2013, there were 872,000. There are also 200 times as many scuba divers now. Three times as many people are swimming. Shark bites have not gone up anywhere near as much. What this means is that you are safer. The chance that you will be bitten has gone way down. Scientists think they know why people are now less likely to be bitten by sharks. They believe it is because there are far fewer sharks around. Fishermen kill about 100 million sharks each year. Spelled out, that is 100,000,000 sharks killed each year. Still, there are so many more people in the water. Sooner or later someone will get bitten. Understanding how sharks behave is important. It can help people stay safe. Sharks do not mean to bite us. Sometimes they get confused. They think our hand or foot is a small fish. A smart idea is to stay away from things sharks hunt. If you see a large group of fish in the water there could be trouble. Sharks might show up soon. They eat fish and seals. It is best to get out of the water right away. Sharks might mistake your foot for a fish.