Posing on the beach with a shark catch, delaying its release, is against Florida law. Some sharks die before they can get back out to sea. FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. — After a hard fight, South Florida fisherman Viktor Hluben pulled in his catch with the help of his friends. His reward for the nighttime battle on the beach was a 14-foot great hammerhead shark. His friends dragged the shark ashore by the tail. As it lay motionless in the water, five of them posed for photos and video. Moving quickly, they cut the fishing line and hauled the shark into waist-deep water, its mouth streaked with blood. In the weeks after the shark swam off, a YouTube video of the event got more than 1 million hits. Hluben and his friends received international media coverage. Videos of land-based fishers catching great hammerheads, tiger sharks and other big predators are becoming more popular. People are starting to wonder two things: is fishing like this legal and is the shark likely to live after being released? David Shiffman, a shark scientist at the University of Miami, criticized the media for celebrating such catches. They use vivid words, he says, but stories fail to note that great hammerheads are [endangered](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species). Hauling them ashore is against the law in Florida. You are not allowed to delay the release of protected animals to measure or photograph them, said Shiffman. He says the law does not require fishers to release a shark from up on the beach. Rama Shuster, from the state wildlife agency, agreed it is not legal to keep animals when only catch-and-release fishing is allowed. He also said, “There’s never a time when it’s OK to drag it up on the beach and pose for pictures.” Concerns about human safety make the job of state wildlife officers harder. Shuster said they are nervous about questioning the actions of fishers at the moment of releasing a shark. The agency only wrote five tickets for possession of protected shark species last year. One was for a boat and the others were on land. Three of those came from a single enforcement stop, spokeswoman Amanda Nalley said. “Our law enforcement staff is aware of these videos,” she said in an email. For videos where officers weren’t present, they don’t always know all of the facts. Hluben said his group did its best to release the shark quickly and safely. When you fish, you have no idea what you’re going to catch, he said. “If you do happen to catch something that big, you don’t want to go into chest-deep water to unhook it." It’s a matter of human life or a shark’s life. Hluben suggested people who want to protect sharks should go after commercial shark fishing. "Who’s going to go after some kid posting on YouTube when you can go after the people killing hundreds at a time?” Robert Hueter, director of a shark research center, said many sharks die from the strain of catch-and-release fishing. Hammerheads can still die, especially after long fights. “All of it’s OK until they decide to drag the animal up on the beach,” he said. “At that point, that animal is holding its breath. This is like basically holding you under the water and doing things with you while you hold your breath. Everyone wants to shoot a video that they can put on YouTube. They want to get the animal out of the water, they want to all pose with it and then they’ll push it back in. Well, it may not be quick enough for some of these species like the hammerhead.” People get the animal out of the water to take pictures with it before they push it back in. "It may not be quick enough for some of these species like the hammerhead.”