Photos and videos of shark catches still wind up online, even though fishers could be fined for risking the animal's life. FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. — South Florida fisherman Viktor Hluben pulls in his catch after a hard fight. On the end of his line tonight is a 14-foot great hammerhead shark. A group of friends drag the big fish onto a beach by the tail. They take photos and video while the shark lies still. Then they cut the fishing line and haul the bloody shark into waist-deep water. In the weeks after, a YouTube video of the event got more than 1 million hits. Hluben and his friends received worldwide attention. Videos of land-based fishers catching hammerheads and other sharks are becoming more popular. People are starting to wonder two things: is fishing like this allowed and is the shark likely to live after being let go? David Shiffman, a scientist, criticized the press for celebrating such catches. He says they use exciting headlines but fail to note that great hammerheads are [endangered](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered species). Pulling them onto the beach is against the law in Florida. Fishers are not supposed to take pictures before they let the animals go, said Shiffman. He also says fishers don't have to release sharks from up on the beach. Rama Shuster, a state wildlife officer, noted catch-and-release laws. He said it is not OK to keep animals when only catch-and-release fishing is allowed. People are never allowed to drag sharks up on the beach to take pictures. Concerns about human safety make the job of state wildlife officers harder. Shuster said they are cautious and don't want to confuse fishers when they release a shark. The agency only wrote five tickets for possession of protected sharks last year. One was for a boat and the others were on land. Three of those were from a single enforcement stop, spokeswoman Amanda Nalley said. Our officers are aware of these videos, she said. When officers aren’t present during videos, they don’t always know all of the facts. Hluben said his group did its best to release the shark quickly and safely. When you fish, you have no idea what you’re going to catch, he said. “If you do happen to catch something that big, you don’t want to go into chest-deep water to unhook it." It’s a matter of human life or a shark’s life. He said the problem is people who make money on shark fishing. Those people kill hundreds of sharks at a time. Robert Hueter, from a shark science center, said many tired sharks die from catch-and-release fishing. Hammerheads can still die after long fights. “All of it’s OK until they decide to drag the animal up on the beach,” he said. “At that point, that animal is holding its breath. This is like basically holding you under the water and doing things with you while you hold your breath. Everyone wants to shoot a video that they can put on YouTube." People get the animal out of the water to take pictures with it before they push it back in. "It may not be quick enough for some of these species like the hammerhead.”