Whale shark DNA tells a story. Whale sharks are the largest fish in the ocean, but they are difficult to study. To learn about them, scientists must go to great lengths. They spy on them from the air or tag them with devices to track them by satellite. Sometimes scientists sneak up on the sharks to collect tissue samples. Now, there may be an easier way. Scientists from Denmark, a country in Scandinavia, and Qatar, a country in the Middle East, recently teamed up. They wanted to study a group of whale sharks. These whale sharks were discovered in the Persian Gulf in Western Asia. So the scientists decided to try something new. They gathered seawater around the sharks and studied the "environmental DNA" in the water. DNA is part of both people and animals. It is passed from parents to children. It tells a lot about an individual. DNA also gives us information about how groups of animals are related. Seawater can have environmental DNA in it. For example, shed skin cells, blood or waste can be passed into the environment by sea creatures. A report published Monday in Nature Ecology & Evolution describes what the scientists found. They studied a group of 200 recently discovered whale sharks. The scientists used 20 samples of seawater. They were able to estimate the number of breeding females in the population. They also found that the sharks were more closely related to sharks from the Indian and Pacific Oceans than to ones in the Atlantic Ocean. The seawater samples were collected from 15 spots in the Persian Gulf. Most of the samples contained just 6 cups of water. The scientists used machines to decode the DNA found in the water. They looked at the sharks' genes. These are sections of DNA that give instructions for how each part of the body should look and behave. The scientists were able to tell the total number of genetic traits of the Persian Gulf whale sharks. They compared this to the number of traits of the sharks' cousins in the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans. The scientists also had DNA from tissue samples from 61 whale sharks who swam in the same waters. They used the DNA from the other sharks to check their work. The scientists compared collections of mutations, or changes, in the sharks' genes. These sets of changes tend to be passed down from parent to child. They found similar amounts of changes in both the seawater and the whale shark tissue.  Based on the number of changes in the DNA, the scientists were able to determine the population of mothers in the group. They estimated this "effective female population size" to be between 43,618 and 183,526\. The scientists then did the same calculation using the tissue samples instead of the seawater DNA. They came up with a range of 85,087 to 351,654 females. The two ranges differed by quite a bit. However, the scientists said the fact that they overlapped at all is a good thing. It shows that using seawater DNA might be a good way to estimate population size. The seawater samples also contained DNA from mackerel tuna. In fact, the greater the amount of whale shark DNA in the water, the greater the amount of tuna DNA. The opposite was also true. When whale shark DNA was scarce, tuna DNA was scarce. The scientists said this is most probably a sign that the whale sharks had come to the area to hunt the tuna. Other groups have already used environmental DNA to figure out what types of sea creatures live in certain waters. However, the scientists said that this study did something new. It is the first to show that environmental DNA can give important information about a group of animals and their habitat.