Sharks can't breathe out of water and hauling them ashore just for a photo or video to post online, is against the law. FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. — Fisherman Viktor Hluben pulls in his catch after a hard fight. On the end of his line tonight is a 14-foot great hammerhead shark. The fish is famous for the shape of its head. A group of friends drag it onto the beach by the tail. They take photos and video. The shark lies still in the water. Then the fishers cut the line and haul the bloody shark into waist-deep water. A YouTube video of the event got more than 1 million hits a few weeks later. People all over the world watched the catch. Videos of fishers catching sharks are becoming more popular. People are starting to ask questions about fishing for sharks. Is fishing like this allowed? Is the shark likely to live after being let go? David Shiffman, who studies ocean science, doesn't like videos of such catches. He says they use exciting headlines but don't tell the whole story. They should note that hammerheads are [endangered](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species). Pulling them onto the beach is against the law in Florida. People are not supposed to take pictures before they let the animals go, said Shiffman. Captain Rama Shuster, a state wildlife official, said catch-and-release fishing laws mean people have to let caught fish go. People are also never allowed to drag sharks up on the beach to take pictures. The safety of the fishermen makes the laws trickier. Shuster said officers don't want to make it hard to safely release a shark. The agency only wrote five tickets for possession of protected sharks last year. One was for a boat and the others were on land. Three of those came from a single stop, spokeswoman Amanda Nalley said. Officers are aware of these videos, she said. When they aren’t present during videos, they don’t know all of the facts. Hluben said his group released the shark quickly and safely. When you fish, you have no idea what you’re going to catch, he said. If you catch a shark, you don't want to go into deep water to let it go. Hluben said the real problem is people who make money on shark fishing. Those people kill hundreds of sharks at a time. Robert Hueter, a shark scientist, said sharks can die from catch-and-release fishing. Tired sharks can still die after long fights. Catching a shark is OK until they pull it up on the beach, he said. Then the animal is holding its breath. Heuter said this is like holding you under water and doing things with you while you hold your breath. "Everyone wants to shoot a video that they can put on YouTube," he said. That's why people pull sharks out of the water before they push them back in. "Well, it may not be quick enough for some" sharks like the hammerhead.