Whale shark DNA tells a story. Whale sharks are the largest fish in the ocean, but their size doesn't make them any easier to study. Scientists hoping to learn about them must spy on them from the air, tag them with devices so they can be tracked via satellite or sneak up on them to collect tissue samples for analysis. But there may be an easier way. Researchers from Denmark and Qatar were able to learn about a group of whale sharks in the Persian Gulf without using any of those methods. Instead, the researchers gathered the seawater around them and analyzed the "environmental DNA" it contained. A report published Monday in Nature Ecology & Evolution describes the researchers' findings. The research team used 20 samples of seawater to study the recently discovered group of about 200 whale sharks. They were able to show that the group was more closely related to whale sharks from the tropical portions of the Indian and Pacific oceans than to the colonies in the Atlantic. They were also able to estimate the number of breeding females in the population. The surface seawater samples were collected from 15 spots around the Al Shaheen oil field, where the whale sharks had been observed. Most of the samples contained just 1.5 liters of water, which is just over 6 cups. The researchers used DNA sequencing machines to decode the mitochondrial DNA extracted from the water. DNA sequencing gives information about the exact genetic structure of a creature. Mitochondrial DNA, which is passed down from mother to child virtually unchanged, is often used in evolutionary biology to determine whether two populations of animals are related. The researchers zeroed in on just a few sections of the mitochondrial genome, which is a complete set of genetic instructions. This allowed them to gauge the genetic diversity, the total number of genetic characteristics, of the Persian Gulf whale sharks. They then compared the sharks to their cousins in the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific oceans. The team also had access to mitochondrial DNA from tissue samples collected from 61 whale sharks who swam in the same waters. They used the DNA from the other sharks to check their work. The researchers found genetic fingerprints — collections of mutations known as haplotypes — in similar frequencies in both the seawater and the whale shark tissue. What's more, the catalog of haplotypes gathered from the seawater was more complete than the ones contained in the tissue samples alone. By counting up the accumulated mutations in certain parts of the genome, the researchers calculated that the whale sharks had an "effective female population size" of between 43,618 and 183,526\. This is the population of mothers that give birth to the next generation. Doing the same analysis with the tissue samples instead of the DNA from seawater yielded a range of 85,087 to 351,654 females. The average of the two ranges was off by nearly a factor of two (71,600 versus 138,400). However, the fact that they overlapped at all shows that environmental DNA offers a promising way to estimate effective population size, the researchers wrote. The seawater samples also contained DNA fragments from mackerel tuna, which spawn near Al Shaheen. In fact, the greater the concentration of whale shark DNA, the greater the concentration of tuna DNA. The reverse was also true. When whale shark DNA was relatively scarce, tuna DNA was scarce as well. This is most probably a sign that the whale sharks had come to the area to hunt the tuna, the researchers wrote. Other groups have already used environmental DNA to identify the inhabitants of certain waters. However, this is the first study to show that environmental DNA can provide meaningful information about a population of animals and the biodiversity of their habitat, the authors wrote.