A researcher in South Florida catches blacktip sharks, then inserts a transmitter to track where they go and what they do. FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. — Science teacher Stephen Kajiura and three of his students were on a boat out in the ocean. They were hoping to catch sharks. Thousands of blacktip sharks come to South Florida every winter. The animals travel from up north looking for warmer waters. Kajiura has been catching some of these sharks. He is putting transmitters inside their bodies. A transmitter is a small machine that gives off sounds or other kinds of signals. Such signals allow scientists to track a transmitter. Once Kajiura has put a transmitter in a shark, he sets the animal free. Scientists can then track where the shark is going. The sharks come from as far away as North Carolina each year. They spend the winter in South Florida's warm waters. Then, they head back up north. Blacktip sharks typically grow to be 5 or 6 feet long. They sometimes bite people. These attacks usually are not that serious, however. The sharks sometimes grab a human hand or foot. Once they realize they have not caught a fish, they usually let go right away. Last year, two people in South Florida were bitten by blacktip sharks: a man and a 9-year-old boy. Neither was badly harmed. Kajiura said it is important to understand just where the sharks are going. It is also important to understand if they are changing where they go. Sharks are good for South Florida’s ocean waters, Kaijura said. Sharks eat a lot of fish. They help keep ocean life in balance. There could be problems if the sharks stop coming. South Florida might end up with too many of certain kinds of fish. Those fish eat other, smaller fish. Soon, there could be too few of the smaller fish. The smaller fish eat plants. Without enough of them, certain plants would become overgrown. Since 2011, Kajiura has been studying where sharks go during the winter. He said they look for places that are just warm enough for them to be comfortable. South Florida might not be their favorite winter spot for too much longer, though. Temperatures around the world are rising. Scientists say this is because of pollution. The rise in temperatures is known as global warming. Kajiura said blacktip sharks might change their habits as temperatures get warmer. The animals could start to spend their winters further north. They might no longer come down as far as South Florida. Then, certain kinds of fish could become too common. On a Tuesday morning, Kajiura and his crew set out to catch a few sharks. The team laid out 60 hooks. All were attached to a floating line. The scientists put hunks of mackerel and fish heads on the hooks so the sharks would bite them. The team caught two sharks. Then things started to go wrong. One shark escaped before they could put a transmitter in it. They did manage to get a transmitter into the other shark. However, it died almost immediately. It was too upset about being caught. “That’s very rare,” Kajiura said. Usually, "the sharks get away just fine. We’ve only lost a couple of animals ever.” Kajiura has put transmitters into about a dozen sharks since December. The transmitters give off pinging sounds. These pings are so high-pitched they cannot be heard by fish or other ocean animals. Each transmitter's pings have their own pattern. Because of this, scientists are able to find each of the sharks. “We’re interested in what these sharks are doing when they’re here,” he said. “Where are they going when they leave? How far up the coast do they go?”