Filming a TV reality show off California's coast, fishermen caught a record-size mako shark. But, animal lovers ask, did it have to die for the cameras? HUNTINGTON BEACH, Calif. — “Yeehaw!” the sport fishermen yelled when they saw the fins above the gray water. The chopped fish had worked as bait. The fight was on. The cameras were running. The men on the boat were part of a reality TV show called “The Professionals.” They hooked the giant mako shark. Then Jason Johnston got strapped into a harness to bring it in. He battled the beast for 2-1/2 hours. The shark swam almost a mile. It thrashed. It jumped 20 feet in the air. The fishermen finally tied it to the side of their boat with steel cable. Once they weighed the shark, they realized they may have broken a record. The shark was 1,323.5 pounds. The men posed next to the blue fish and opened its jaws to show its rows of teeth to the cameras. The teeth were as sharp as knives. But plenty of people wondered why they had to kill such a magnificent animal. Wouldn’t just pulling it close and photographing it have been enough? “They can bring it up close, take a picture and let the shark go,” said Ben Ahadpour, who owns the marina the fishermen used. David McGuire, the director of a group that fights for the protection of sharks, was shocked. So many television programs about sharks continue to focus on terror rather than science, he complained. To him, the programs don't show reality. "The reality is we’re overfishing sharks," he said. Matt Potter is the captain of the boat that carried the men who caught the fish. His nickname is “Mako Matt” and he disagrees with the criticism. “It’s just like any other fishing. The state limit for mako is two per person per day.” Jack Vitek of a fishing association said the catch was “enormous.” Just seeing a fish weighing more than 1,000 pounds was rare, he said. Catching one is even less common. The shortfin mako is a really hard to catch because it is very fast. Makos are common off the coast of Southern California. Young sharks live there. They tend to stay in the open ocean. They do not scare swimmers and surfers by coming into the surf like great whites do. Makos typically eat small fish. They move on to larger fish as they get older, said biologist Nick Wegner. They are some of the fastest sharks in the ocean. This makes the catch all the more interesting, he said. Makos can warm up their bodies. This makes their muscles move faster. Wegner said some of his coworkers want to collect samples to learn more about the fish. The shark was probably a female based on its size, he said. Male makos usually reach 500 to 600 pounds. One thing they want to know about is what's in the shark’s stomach. Mako sharks normally eat fish. Howeer, a small baby seal was once found in a captured mako’s stomach. Professor Chris Lowe also sees a rare opportunity, particularly if the shark was pregnant. One of his students hopes to get samples of the shark’s liver and the livers of its babies, if any. They will use the samples to measure pollution levels. The scientists described the mako population as stable. They did not express scientific concerns about the catch. “It’s always good to know that those big sharks are out there,” Wegner said. “On a personal level, it makes me a little sad to take such a big animal out of the ocean.”