A wetlands restoration project in the bay led to an explosion of fish, crabs and worms. A lot of leopard sharks are coming to San Francisco to sit and dine as the tides go out. SAN JOSE, Calif. — When Northern California residents think of sharks along the southern edges of San Francisco Bay, they think of the National Hockey League's San Jose Sharks. Now, a different type of shark is making a name for itself in the area. Researchers are finding large numbers of leopard sharks in the bay. Known for their distinctive silvery skin with dark spots, some are up to six feet long. The leopard sharks' presence is proof that the bay's health is improving. The federal and state governments began the largest wetlands restoration project ever attempted on the West Coast in 2003. They spent $100 million to buy 15,100 acres of salt ponds from a company called Cargill. For decades, Cargill evaporated bay water in the ponds to produce salt for food, road de-icing and medicine. The ponds were so salty that almost nothing lived in them. For the past five years, work has been done to restore thousands of acres of salt ponds along the bay’s shoreline. When the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, state Coastal Conservancy and other agencies began opening the salt ponds to bay tides, millions of fish, crabs, clams and other species poured in. Ducks, coastal birds called herons and fish are thriving in the former ponds, which are being restored to tidal marshes. A tidal marsh is covered and uncovered by the daily rise and fall of the bay waters. The fact that sharks are also in the tidal marshes is a good sign, scientists say. The sharks have been swimming into old salt evaporation ponds. There the leopard sharks gobble up herring fish, crabs, worms and other species that have exploded in number as the ponds have been opened to bay waters. There’s so much food that sometimes leopard sharks sit at the salt pond openings as the tides rush out, gorging themselves like Homer Simpson under a soft-serve ice cream machine. “It’s pretty much a buffet tray for them,” said Jim Hobbs, a biologist who is helping lead the research in areas along the bay. On some days, scientists are catching and releasing as many as 30 sharks in one hour, Hobbs said. Unlike their great white cousins, leopard sharks don’t eat people. “They have very tiny teeth. It’s like sandpaper,” Hobbs said. “At most, they might give you a scrape.” Similarly, the scientists aren’t killing leopard sharks. The worst they do is make them vomit. Scientists could catch the leopard sharks and cut them open to study what the sharks eat when they swim into the old salt ponds. But instead, the scientists catch the sharks in nets. Then they place a nozzle in the sharks’ mouths and spray water into their stomachs. The spray water makes the sharks throw up. Once researchers and their students have a bucket full of what was in the sharks' stomachs, they return the big fish to the water. “It doesn’t hurt them,” Hobbs said. “We throw them back within two or three minutes, they swim away, and they start eating again.” Researchers save the thrown-up shark food to determine what the sharks are eating. So far, more than 3,000 acres of former salt ponds have been opened to bay waters. Most of the areas opened are less than 10 feet deep. During low tides, large sections of the old salt ponds are so shallow that mud can be seen. Before 2003, leopard sharks that wanted to eat from those shallow waters had to swim to the middle of the bay every low tide to avoid being washed ashore. Now they can stay in some former salt ponds for days and fatten up, Hobbs said. Exact numbers are unavailable for the leopard shark population in the bay. But experts say their return to the area is a good thing. “We’re starting to see a lot more leopard sharks, and also bat rays in the ponds now,” said Eric Mruz, a manager of San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge. “This tells us the water quality is getting better,” he said. “And it shows that these former salt ponds are providing tremendous amounts of fish, worms, crabs and other species. It tells us the South Bay is getting healthier.” Most people don’t realize that sharks live in San Francisco Bay, said Christina Slager. She is director of animal care at the Aquarium of the Bay in San Francisco. But there are four species — leopard, spiny dogfish, brown smooth hound and sevengill — that are commonly found in the bay. None of them eat people. No two leopard sharks have the same spots. They aren’t [endangered](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species), Slager said, but face threats, from fishing to mercury pollution. They never get the attention great whites get. “If Steven Spielberg would do a movie about leopard sharks, that would be wonderful,” Slager said. “They are delightful. They have beautiful patterns. And they are a pleasure to work with.” But that would hardly be a scary movie like "Jaws."