The answer is important. If there are only a few sharks, the government will decide to protect them. If there are many sharks, the government won't have to. How many great white sharks swim near California? It is a mystery. Some scientists say that there are a lot of sharks. Others say that there are way too few. Nobody knows for sure. But the question has become very important. If there are not enough sharks around, they have to be protected. The government has to decide. Sharks sometimes get caught in fishing nets. But protecting them could hurt some fishermen. Strict rules mean fishermen can't earn as much money. “This is a tough one," said Adrianna Shea. She is a California fish and wildlife official. Scientists do not agree about the sharks. Some want sharks to be named an [endangered species](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species). That means they are about to be wiped out. They counted only 219 great white sharks. Other scientists counted sharks near San Francisco. They came up with a bigger number. Michael L. Domeier is a shark expert. He thinks the shark count is much too low. He has studied sharks for a long time. Other scientists are doing another count. It will show there are more than 2,000 white sharks. Sharks are hard to count, said Barbara Block. She's one of the scientists doing the count. It is easier to count elephants or lions, she said. But you can't miss 2,000 sharks. Chris Lowe is a scientist. He has been studying white sharks. He has equipment to listen for shark sounds under the Manhattan Beach Pier. You could catch a white shark there, he said. Eric Martin works at the aquarium at the end of the pier. One day last July, a fisherman caught a young white shark. It was 7 feet long. Martin told him that it was against the law to catch it. But the fisherman would not let it go. Martin cut the fisherman's line with a knife. Martin said he doesn't do that anymore. Now, he lets people fight the shark and he takes their pictures. Then he asks them to let the shark go. He gives them a picture to remember their catch.