The fish, crab and clam population has exploded in the bay, thanks to a huge restoration project. And now there are bigger fish, like leopard sharks, to eat them. SAN JOSE, Calif. — Leopard sharks are making a home for themselves in San Francisco Bay. The sharks' presence is a sign that government efforts to improve the bay's health are working. Leopard sharks have silvery skin with dark spots. They can be as big as six feet long. Just like no two people have the same fingerprints, no two leopard sharks have the same spots. They're harmless, to humans at least. Great white sharks eat people. Leopard sharks do not. “They have very tiny teeth. It’s like sandpaper,” said biologist Jim Hobbs. “At most, they might give you a scrape.” The federal and state governments spent $100 million to buy 15,100 acres of salt ponds in 2003 from a company called Cargill. For many years, Cargill evaporated bay water in the ponds to produce salt. The salt was used for food, road de-icing and medicine. The ponds were so salty that almost nothing lived in them. Now ducks, fish and birds called herons are living in the old salt ponds. The ponds have been turned into tidal marshes. These swampy lands get covered and uncovered by the daily rise and fall of the bay waters. More than 3,000 acres of former salt ponds have been opened up to let the bay waters flow in. The fact that leopard sharks are also in the new marshes is a good sign, scientists say. Millions of fish, crabs, clams, worms and other species now live there. Leopard sharks swim into the tidal marshes to eat the species. There’s so much food that sometimes leopard sharks sit at the salt pond openings as the tides rush out, stuffing themselves. They almost look like Homer Simpson stuffing himself on soft-serve ice cream. “It’s pretty much a buffet tray for them,” said Hobbs. There is no San Francisco Bay leopard shark population count. But on some days, scientists are catching and releasing as many as 30 sharks in one hour, Hobbs said. Scientists catch the sharks in nets. Instead of cutting them open to study what the sharks eat when they swim into the old salt ponds, they place a nozzle in the sharks’ mouths. Scientists then spray water into the sharks' stomachs. The spray water makes the sharks throw up. Once scientiests collect the materials in the sharks' stomachs, they return the big fish to the water. “It doesn’t hurt them,” Hobbs said. “We throw them back within two or three minutes, they swim away, and they start eating again.” Researchers save the thrown-up shark food to determine what the sharks are eating. Most of the new marshes are only 10 feet deep. Before 2003, leopard sharks that wanted to eat from those shallow waters had to swim to the middle of the bay every low tide. Otherwise, they would be washed ashore. Now, Hobbs said, they can stay in some former salt ponds for days and fatten up. Eric Mruz works at the San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge. He said that the return of the leopard shark to the area means the water quality is getting better. "It tells us the South Bay is getting healthier," Mruz said. Most people don’t realize that sharks live in San Francisco Bay, said Christina Slager. She is in charge of animal care at the Aquarium of the Bay in San Francisco. But there are four species of shark that are commonly found in the bay: leopard, spiny dogfish, brown smooth hound and sevengill. None of them eat people. Leopard sharks aren’t [endangered](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species), Slager said. But they face threats, from fishing to mercury pollution. They never get the attention great whites get. Perhaps because they just aren't as scary as the Great Whites portrayed in the movie "Jaws." “If Steven Spielberg would do a movie about leopard sharks, that would be wonderful,” Slager said. “They are delightful. They have beautiful patterns. And they are a pleasure to work with.” 