The distinctive sharks are flourishing in the bay, thanks to an explosion of fish, crabs and worms. Sometimes they just sit there, open their mouths, and let the tides bring them food. SAN JOSE, Calif. — When Northern California residents think of sharks along the southern edges of San Francisco Bay, they think of the National Hockey League's San Jose Sharks. Now, a different type of shark is making a name for itself in the area. Researchers are finding large numbers of leopard sharks, some up to six feet long, in the bay. Known for their distinctive silvery skin with dark spots, the leopard sharks' presence is proof that the bay's health is improving. For the last five years, work has been done to restore thousands of acres of industrial salt ponds along the bay’s shoreline. Ducks, coastal birds called herons, and fish are thriving in the former ponds, which are being restored to tidal marshes, covered and uncovered by the daily rise and fall of the bay's waters. The fact that sharks are also booming is a particularly encouraging sign, scientists say. The sharks have been swimming through levee breaks and into old salt evaporation ponds. There the leopard sharks gobble up herring fish, crabs, worms and other species that have exploded in number as the ponds have been opened to bay waters. There’s so much food that sometimes the leopard sharks sit at the salt pond openings as the tides rush out, gorging themselves like Homer Simpson under a soft-serve ice cream machine. “It’s pretty much a buffet tray for them,” said Jim Hobbs, a biologist who is helping lead the research in particular areas along the bay. There are no hard population counts. But on some days, scientists are catching and releasing as many as 30 sharks in one hour in the shallow waters at the southern edges of the bay, Hobbs said. Unlike their great white cousins, leopard sharks don’t eat people. “They have very tiny teeth. It’s like sandpaper,” Hobbs said. “At most, they might give you a scrape.” Similarly, the scientists aren’t killing leopard sharks. The worst they do is make them vomit. Scientists could catch the sharks and cut them open to study what the sharks eat when they swim into the old salt ponds. But instead, the scientists catch them in nets and with barbless hooks. They take pump sprayers, similar to what backyard gardeners use to spray weed killer, and place the nozzles in the sharks’ mouths. The spray water enters their stomachs and makes the sharks throw up. The researchers and their students then catch the materials in the sharks' stomachs in a bucket. Once the scientists have a bucket full of chewed up little fish and worms, they return the sharks to the water. “It doesn’t hurt them,” Hobbs said. “We throw them back within two or three minutes, they swim away, and they start eating again.” Researchers preserve the thrown-up shark food to carefully classify and determine what the sharks are eating. Federal and state governments began the largest wetlands restoration project ever attempted on the West Coast when they spent $100 million to buy 15,100 acres of salt ponds in 2003 from a company called Cargill. For decades, Cargill evaporated bay water in the ponds to produce salt for food, road de-icing and medicine. The ponds were so salty that almost nothing lived in them. But when the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, state Coastal Conservancy and other agencies began opening the salt ponds to bay tides, millions of fish, crabs, clams and other species poured in. So far, more than 3,000 acres of former salt ponds have been opened to bay waters. Most of the areas opened are less than 10 feet deep, so during low tides vast areas of mud flats are exposed. Traditionally, leopard sharks that wanted to eat from those shallow waters had to swim to the middle of the bay every low tide to avoid being beached. Now, Hobbs said, they can stay in some former salt ponds for days, fattening up. Because there are no good counts of the leopard shark population from the past, estimates of the fish population growth in the bay are unavailable. But in any natural area, when large predators come back, that’s good news, experts say. “We’re starting to see a lot more leopard sharks and also bat rays in the ponds now,” said Eric Mruz, manager of the San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge. Bat rays have flattened, triangular shaped bodies and long tails. “This tells us the water quality is getting better,” he said. “And it shows that these former salt ponds are providing tremendous amounts of fish, worms, crabs and other species. It tells us the South Bay is getting healthier.” Most people don’t realize that sharks live in San Francisco Bay, said Christina Slager, director of animal care at the Aquarium of the Bay in San Francisco. But there are four species — leopard, spiny dogfish, brown smooth hound and sevengill — that are commonly found in the bay. None eats people. No two leopard sharks have the same spots. They aren’t [endangered](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species), Slager said, but face threats, from fishing to mercury pollution. They never get the attention great whites get. “If Steven Spielberg would do a movie about leopard sharks that would be wonderful,” Slager said. “They are delightful. They have beautiful patterns. And they are a pleasure to work with.” But that would hardly be a scary movie like "Jaws."