Scientists make camera with shark's-eye view. Catsharks are not harmful to humans. They also are not much to look at - by the bright light of day, that is. But in the blue light of the deep sea, certain species give off a gorgeous green glow. Now researchers can see this glow because they created a camera with a special lens that mimics catshark fish vision. The lens helps scientists see the glowing catsharks as they see themselves. The deeper the sharks swim, the stronger the glow, the scientists say. They published their ideas in a magazine for scientists. John Sparks works at the American Museum of Natural History's Department of Ichthyology. He was one of the scientists on this project. Sparks and his team study the chain catshark and the swell shark. Few researchers have made the effort to study these shy sharks so deep in the sea. These two species live 2,000 feet below the surface of the ocean. As light travels toward the bottom of the ocean, the seawater absorbs most wavelengths of visible light before it reaches 700 feet. Seawater absorbs red and yellow wavelengths really well. But it does not absorb blue wavelengths, which is why the ocean appears blue. So by the time the light reaches the catsharks 1,300 feet later, the animals are bathed mostly in blue hues.  Catsharks' skin can absorb some of that blue. Their skin changes it, or converts it, and the skin then radiates with a green glow. This is called biofluorescence. This is different from bioluminescence, where the animal produces the light with its own body. The chemistry that makes firefly butts glow is bioluminesce.  In earlier projects, Sparks and his team had seen catsharks glowing, or fluorescing. "We've already shown that catsharks are brightly fluorescent, and this work takes that research a step further," Sparks said. He and his team are hoping to learn why catsharks and other marine animals biofluoresce. For catsharks, Sparks thinks that glowing makes it easier for catsharks to see each other in the blue light of the deep ocean.  It is hard for humans to understand what a bioluminescent deep-sea creature is supposed to look like because their colorful displays are not made for human eyes. They are made for the blue and green spaces in the deep sea. With the special fishy camera lens in place, the scientists could suddenly see the fluorescence appear. The scientists  could dive only to the most shallow regions of the sharks' territory, but they used math models to imagine what would happen even deeper in the ocean. They showed that the deeper the catshark, the bluer the water, and the stronger the glow.  "Imagine being at a disco party with only blue lighting, so everything looks blue," David Gruber said in an interview with National Geographic. He is a scientist at Baruch College, City University of New York and the American Museum of Natural History. "Suddenly, someone jumps onto the dance floor with an outfit covered in patterned fluorescent paint that converts blue light into green. They would stand out like a sore thumb. That's what these sharks are doing." Gruber believes the research shows that the sharks use their glowing patterns to spot each other and communicate with one another. Each species had distinct green patterns. The different sexes also had distinct green patterns. "It reminds me of when researchers first tuned in to the high frequency of bat sounds, and they discovered all this hidden chatter. They had to then figure out what it meant," he added. There is more work to do before researchers can be sure that the sharks glow even more in deeper water. Christine Bedore works at Georgia Southern University. She was not involved in the study. She told the Atlantic that she was "pretty doubtful that the fluorescence has any ecological relevance." But Gruber, who found evidence of the first biofluorescent reptile (a sea turtle) last year, is eager to study the phenomenon more and to create more animal-eye cameras to help scientists understand how other creatures experience our world.