California coast visitors are now 91 percent less likely to be bitten by a great white shark than they were in 1950, likely because beach populations of humans have risen dramatically In North Carolina this summer, more people are being bitten by sharks than ever before. However, that does not mean your chance of getting bitten is increasing. In fact, a new study says the risk is dropping all over the world. The new study looked just at great white sharks in California. However, what it found is probably true for the whole world. The study shows that the California coast is now much safer for visitors. They are around 11 times less likely to be bitten by a great white than they were in 1950. At the same time, shark bites along the California coast have increased in number. In the 1950s, there was an average of one shark attack a year. Between 2004 and 2013, there were three attacks every two years. In other words, there are now one and a half times as many shark attacks as in the 1950s. How can people be less likely to be bitten if the number of attacks is going up? The answer is that there are a whole lot more people in the water these days. Francesco Ferreti led the new study. It is true that "the number of attacks has increased since the 1950s," he said. However, the number of people in ocean waters "has increased much faster." The result is that a person is now less likely to be attacked. The same pattern can be seen in North Carolina, where the population and tourism have been rising. "The number of people going in the water is always increasing," said shark expert Chuck Bangley. North Carolina is seeing near-record numbers of people at the beach this year. One reason for this is a heat wave. The risk of being bitten by a shark is incredibly low, Bangley said. It is far less likely than drowning, for example. Still, “the more people you have going into the water, the better the odds are that something bad is going to happen.” In California, the number of people in the ocean has grown enormously over the past 60 years. There are now about 125 times as many surfers as there were in 1950. Back in 1950, there were about 7,000 surfers. By 2013, there were 872,000. There are also 200 times as many scuba divers. Overall, beach use has tripled. In the 1950s, California beaches had around 53 million visitors each year. Today that number has risen to 165 million. Shark bites increased much less over the same period of time. Ferreti said that means the risk of an attack has actually declined by quite a bit. The reason for the lower risk is not clear. One possible explanation is that there are far fewer sharks around than there used to be. Overfishing is the main reason for the big drop in shark populations. Humans kill about 100 million sharks every year. "We're killing 10 million sharks for every 1 that kills us," said shark expert George Burgess. Understanding shark behavior can help humans avoid bites, Burgess said. "We're the animals with the brains, they're the ones with the teeth, and we're in their house," he said. It is up to us to change our behavior, he said. Most bites are actually mistakes on the shark's part. Sharks often mistake a human foot or hand for the small fish they usually go after. A smart idea for humans in the sea is to stay away from seal and sea lion colonies. Sharks prey on both animals. It is also wise to avoid fishing piers, where sharks often hang around looking for scraps. Avoiding schools of fish can also lower the risk of a shark bite. If you think sharks may be hunting somewhere nearby, "get out of the water," Bangley said. Doing that will make it much less likely that a shark will bite you by accident.