Whale shark DNA tells a story. Whale sharks are the largest fish in the ocean. Their huge size doesn't make them any easier to study, though. To learn about them, scientists must spy on them from the air, tag them with devices so they can be tracked by satellite or sneak up on them to collect tissue samples. But there may be an easier way. Researchers from Denmark and Qatar studied a group of whale sharks in the Persian Gulf using a new method. They gathered seawater around the sharks and analyzed the "environmental DNA" in the water. DNA contains instructions for how an organism looks and works and it is passed from parents to children. A report published Monday in Nature Ecology & Evolution describes the researchers' findings. The research team studied a group of 200 recently discovered whale sharks. Using 20 samples of seawater, the team was able to estimate the number of breeding females in the population. They also found that the group was more closely related to whale sharks from parts of the Indian and Pacific Oceans than to whale sharks in the Atlantic Ocean. The seawater samples were collected from 15 spots around the Al Shaheen oil field off the coast of Qatar, where the whale sharks had been observed. Most of the samples contained just over 6 cups of water. The researchers used DNA sequencing machines to decode the mitochondrial DNA found in the water. DNA sequencing gives information about the exact genetic structure of a creature. Mitochondria are the tiny parts of a cell that make energy. Mitochondrial DNA gets passed down from mother to child virtually unchanged, so scientists often use it to determine whether two populations of animals are related. If they are, their mitochondrial DNA will match. The researchers focused on a few sections of the mitochondrial DNA. This allowed them to determine the genetic diversity, the total number of genetic characteristics, of the Persian Gulf whale sharks. They compared the sharks to their cousins in the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans. The team also had mitochondrial DNA from tissue samples from 61 whale sharks who swam in the same waters. They used the DNA from the other sharks to check their work. The researchers compared collections of mutations, known as haplotypes, between the two populations. Haplotypes tend to be passed down from generation to generation. The researchers found the haplotypes in similar frequencies in both the seawater and the whale shark tissue. What's more, the catalog of haplotypes gathered from the seawater was more complete than the ones contained in the tissue samples. The researchers used the number of mutations in certain parts of the genome to calculate the population of mothers that give birth to the next generation. They estimated this "effective female population size" to be between 43,618 and 183,526\. The researchers then did the same analysis using the tissue samples instead of the seawater DNA. They calculated a range of 85,087 to 351,654 females. The two ranges differed by quite a bit. However, the researchers said the fact that they overlapped at all shows that environmental DNA offers a promising way to estimate effective population size. The seawater samples also contained DNA fragments from mackerel tuna, which spawn near Al Shaheen. In fact, the greater the concentration of whale shark DNA, the greater the concentration of tuna DNA. The reverse was also true. When whale shark DNA was relatively scarce, tuna DNA was scarce as well. The researchers said this is most probably a sign that the whale sharks had come to the area to hunt the tuna. Other groups have already used environmental DNA to identify the inhabitants of certain waters. However, the authors said that this study accomplished something new. It is the first to show that environmental DNA can provide meaningful information about a population of animals and the biodiversity of their habitat.