The deeper they swim, the stronger they glow Catsharks are not harmful to humans, but they also aren't much to look at - by the bright light of day, that is. But in the blue light of the deep sea, certain species give off a gorgeous green glow. Now researchers can see this glow because they created a camera with a special lens that mimics fishy vision. Through this lens, the researchers can see like a catshark, peeking at other catsharks deep under the sea. The researchers say the glow grows stronger and more distinct, the deeper the sharks swim. Their results were published in Scientific Reports. John Sparks, a curator in the American Museum of Natural History's Department of Ichthyology and a co-author of the paper, and his team study the chain catshark and the swell shark, two species that live 2,000 feet below the surface of the ocean. The hermit-like sharks are so remote that not many researchers have made the effort to study these shy creatures.  In earlier research, Sparks and his team had observed catsharks glowing, or fluorescing. As light travels toward the bottom of the ocean, most wavelengths of visible light - red and yellow - are absorbed before they hit 700 feet. But water does not absorb blue light wavelengths, which is why the ocean is blue. By the time the light reaches the catsharks, the animals are bathed mostly in blue hues.  Catsharks' skin can absorb some of that blue and re-emit it as green, which is called biofluorescence. This is different from bioluminescence, where the animal produces the light with its own body such as the chemical reaction in fireflies that makes their butts bioluminesce. "We've already shown that catsharks are brightly fluorescent, and this work takes that research a step further," Sparks said. For Sparks and his team, the goal is to learn why catsharks and other marine animals biofluoresce. Sparks thinks that glowing makes it easier for catsharks to spot other catsharks.  It is hard for humans to appreciate just what a bioluminescent deep-sea creature is supposed to look like. Their colorful displays are not made for human eyes but for the blue and green habitats in the deep sea. With the special fishy camera lens in place, the researchers could see the fluorescence suddenly appear. And while the researchers could dive only to the most shallow regions of the sharks' habitat, they used mathematical modeling to show that the deeper the catshark, the bluer the water, and the stronger the glow.  "Imagine being at a disco party with only blue lighting, so everything looks blue," David Gruber, a researcher at Baruch College, City University of New York and the American Museum of Natural History, said while talking with National Geographic. "Suddenly, someone jumps onto the dance floor with an outfit covered in patterned fluorescent paint that converts blue light into green. They would stand out like a sore thumb. That's what these sharks are doing." Gruber believes the research shows that the sharks use their glowing patterns - which were distinct between species, and again between the two sexes - to communicate with one another. "It reminds me of when researchers first tuned in to the high frequency of bat sounds, and they discovered all this hidden chatter. They had to then figure out what it meant," he added. There is more work to do before researchers can be sure that the sharks glow significantly under natural conditions. Georgia Southern University's Christine Bedore, who was not involved in the study, told the Atlantic she was "pretty doubtful that the fluorescence has any ecological relevance." But Gruber, who found evidence of the first biofluorescent reptile (a sea turtle) last year, is eager to study the phenomenon more, and to create more animal-eye cameras to help scientists understand how other creatures experience our world.