The debate over the number of great white sharks off California's coast will help decide if they should be protected. It’s a mystery of the sea: How many great white sharks are prowling near California’s coast? Some scientists say the population is large and healthy. Others say it is alarmingly small. No one has ever known for certain, but the question has become crucial this year. Authorities are deciding whether to classify the fish scientists know as Carcharodon carcharias as an [endangered species](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species) worth preserving at all costs. That step could, among other things, wipe out what is left of a fishing industry that inadvertently snares great whites. That industry uses nets called "gill nets." “This is a tough one — we are keenly aware that the scientific community is polarized on this issue,” said Adrianna Shea, deputy chief of the California Fish and Game Commission. The great white shark is at the top of the food chain. Few creatures possess its fearsome mystique. It can reach 21 feet and weigh 3-1/2 tons. The great white hunts near waters shared by surfers, scuba divers and swimmers. State and federal authorities have been studying the health of the great white population since last year, when three environmental groups called for endangered species protection. The groups were reacting to the first census of great whites ever attempted. Published in 2011, the census estimated that only 219 great whites lived off the Central California coast, and perhaps again that many in the entire northeastern Pacific Ocean. Other shark experts claim the population is several times larger. This is because of laws curbing pollution, banning near-shore gill netting, protecting sharks and halting the slaughter of marine mammals they prey on. The authors of the census study declined to comment on the merits of the request by the environmental groups. However, one of the them, Sal Jorgensen, said, “I don’t think there is an imminent threat. The money being spent by the government to evaluate this issue would be better spent trying to evaluate this question: Is the number of white sharks rising or falling?” The census was conducted from 2006 to 2008 on sharks that gather off the San Francisco coast from late July until late January. The researchers assumed that no sharks leave or join the group during the study period, and that the group returns to the area at the same time each year, making reliable census estimates possible. The researchers lured great whites close to their boat by slowly pulling a fake seal. They identified 131 individual sharks by the distinctive patterns of nicks, notches and scars on their dorsal fins and then used mathematical models to calculate the likely population. The lead authors of the study, Taylor Chapple and Barbara Block, acknowledged that the estimate of 219 was lower than they had expected. “It’s a lot easier counting elephants and lions,” Block said, referring to animal counts in Tanzania’s Serengeti region. “But we’re not off the mark by 2,000 sharks.” State and federal regulators are expected to decide on endangered species status for great whites this year. They have conducted research and held hearings to analyze the accuracy of the census. Michael L. Domeier, a leading shark expert and president of the Marine Conservation Science Institute, disagrees with the census. His long-term monitoring of white sharks suggests the actual population is much larger. He said adult females do not always visit the coastal gathering sites, and younger white sharks are spread out over a much larger area than adults. Other scientists are nearing completion on a separate census study that will show there are more than 2,000 adult and younger white sharks off Central California. That study is expected to be submitted for review by state and federal regulators. Chris Lowe, a professor of marine biology at Cal State Long Beach, has been conducting white shark research since 2002. “The growth of the great white shark population is the most stunning recovery of a marine fish species we have,” he said. On a recent weekday, Lowe watched as anglers lined a rail at Manhattan Beach Pier trying to snag halibut, bonito and yellowtail. Beneath the waves, a receiver he had installed was picking up the pings of transmitters attached to young white sharks. “The potential for catching a great white shark off this pier is pretty good,” he said. Eric Martin, of the Roundhouse Aquarium at the end of the pier, recalled a weekday last July when a fisherman hooked a 7-foot white shark. Martin explained that it was illegal to land the fish, but the fisherman refused to let it go. Martin cut the line with a knife. Until that day, four white sharks had been caught off the pier since 1980. Last year alone, anglers hooked four juvenile white sharks. A 7-footer was caught and released three weeks ago. “I have a new strategy for dealing with fishermen and white sharks,” Martin said with a smile. “I let the fisherman fight it as long as he wants. When the shark gets close, I take a picture of it and the fisherman. Then I urge him to let it go.” After that, Martin makes prints of the photos and gives them to the fisherman as souvenirs.