Scientists tell ABC’s "Four Corners" that nets are not effective barriers and that a bigger shark population does not increase attacks. Many beaches are protected by large shark nets that are set offshore and designed to trap would-be predators. According to new research, these nets give the impression of safety without actually reducing the likelihood of shark attacks. Laurie Laurenson from Australia's Deakin University concluded that shark nets are ineffective after reviewing decades of records. He presented his findings on the ABC "Four Corners" television show recently. ## Netting Sharks Might Not Be Preventing Attacks Shark expert Barry Bruce agrees with Laurenson's assessment. He explained that shark nets are meant to trap sharks to keep them from attacking nearby swimmers, but the nets are too small to make much of a difference.  “It’s a couple of hundred meters long," he said. "There might be two at a beach which is many, many kilometers long. They are set at a depth offshore where they don’t reach to the surface so they only come up 6 meters or so from the bottom in 10 meters of water." (One meter is just under one yard, and one kilometer is about 0.6 mile.) Given how little area they cover, Bruce said that it was unlikely that nets would catch most approaching sharks. "In some respects you have to be an unlucky shark to get caught,” he said. Bruce noted that nets at Bondi Beach in Sydney, Australia, had caught sharks before, but said that this did not mean the nets had prevented shark attacks. “If you’re dead you can’t bite anybody. What we don’t know is whether that shark would have ever bitten anybody and we don’t know how many sharks swam through the area that didn’t get caught,” he said. ## Why Do Sharks See People As Appetizers? According to Bruce, when sharks and people are near each other, there are usually no attacks. The attacks that do occur might be prevented if we could better understand why sharks bite people, he said. Even if they cannot block every shark from approaching the beach, the fact that shark nets kill sharks might be seen as an indirect way of preventing attacks. The nets reduce the shark population, leaving fewer sharks in the water, and as the shark population goes down, you might think that the number of attacks would also decrease. Oddly, Laurenson found that this assumption turns out to be false. “I can show statistically that there is no relationship between the number of sharks out there and the number of attacks,” Laurenson said on ABC. “I’m surprised that it’s not there, but it’s not there.” ## Snaring The Wrong Sharks Laurenson said that protections like shark nets and drum lines, traps used to lure and capture sharks, probably do not make people safer. In a three-month period in 2014, drum lines in Western Australia caught 172 sharks. The majority were tiger sharks and none were great whites. According to ABC, tiger sharks had not killed anyone in Western Australia for more than 20 years. Natalie Banks works at Sea Shepherd Australia, an organization that works to protect ocean wildlife. She appeared on "Four Corners" along with Laurenson and said that she and her coworkers had seen dolphins, turtles, stingrays and dugongs - a mammal that looks similar to a walrus - dying in shark nets. Despite the criticisms, some are working to improve shark nets and expand their use. A shark net made out of plastic mesh that stretched across the entire beach was installed at Coogee beach in Perth. Whether it would work at larger beaches with bigger waves is unknown. A test will be carried out this year at Ballina in New South Wales. ## Net Believers Vic Paddemors, a shark scientist working for the government, said that although they could not prove statistically that shark nets had prevented attacks, he believed they had. “Without a question of a doubt I can definitely put my hand on my heart and say that I believe that shark nets work and I believe that you are a lot safer at a netted beach,” he said. Rick Fletcher, a spokesperson for the Western Australia Department of Fisheries noted that during the drum-line program in the state, nobody was attacked. He said that this was a sign that the program might be helping. However, Laurenson's research suggested that another factor had more to do with shark attacks than the number of sharks in the water: the number of people in the water. He found a clear link between the number of people in an area and the number of attacks there. ## More People, More Attacks John West from Taronga Conservation Society had been studying sharks in Australia for decades. His research, in agreement with Laurenson's, showed that increases in human population were linked to more shark attacks. West found that, between 1995 and 2004, there was an average of 9.6 unprovoked shark attacks a year in Australia. In the following decade that increased to 12.3\. Meanwhile, Australia’s population increased from about 17 million to more than 23 million, with most of that increase concentrated on the coast.