South Florida's blacktips help researchers learn how climate change might be affecting life in the ocean. FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. — Science professor Stephen Kajiura and three of his students were on a rocky boat off of Singer Island. They were there to catch sharks. Thousands of blacktip sharks come within yards of South Florida’s beaches every winter. The animals migrate from up north in search of warmer waters. Kajiura is catching them and putting transmitters inside their bodies. The transmitters allow scientists to track the sharks once the animals are released back into the ocean. The sharks come from as far away as North Carolina each year. They spend the winter in South Florida's warm waters, then head back up north. Kajiura said it is important to understand just where the sharks are going, and if their routes are changing. Sharks play an important part in South Florida’s waters, he said. They help keep ocean life in balance. Sharks are excellent hunters. They help keep the populations of various types of fish from getting too large. When there are too many of a certain type of fish, things start to go wrong in the ocean. Those fish eat other, smaller fish and there end up being too few of the smaller fish. The smaller fish eat plants, and, without enough of them, certain plants become overgrown. Kajiura has been studying shark migration since 2011. He said the sharks' movements can change by how warm or cold the water is. Temperatures around the world have been rising. The rise in temperatures is known as global warming or climate change. Blacktip sharks might start to spend their winters further north as temperatures continue to rise, Kajiura said. They may no longer come down as far as South Florida. The kinds of fish they eat might then become too common. Blacktip sharks typically grow to be 5 or 6 feet long. It is not uncommon for them to bite people, but the attacks are usually not that serious. The sharks sometimes grab a human hand or foot, but once they realize they have not caught a fish, they will let go right away. Last year, two people in South Florida were bitten by blacktip sharks — a man and a 9-year-old boy. Neither was badly hurt. On a recent Tuesday morning, Kajiura and his three students set out to look for sharks. To catch the animals, they laid out 60 hooks. The hooks were attached to a line that was held up by floating buoys in the water. The sharks were lured into biting the hooks with hunks of mackerel and fish heads. After an hour, Kajiura and the others began hauling up the line. The team had caught two sharks, but the trip ended up being a failure anyway. One shark escaped before they could put a transmitter in it. They did manage to get a transmitter into the other shark. However, it swam away very weakly after being released. Kajiura decided he should check on the shark. He put on flippers and a mask and dove into the water. After a minute or two, he swam toward the boat, pulling the shark with one arm. A few minutes later, it was dead. It had been killed by the shock of being captured. “That’s very rare,” Kajiura said. Almost always, "the sharks get away just fine. We’ve only lost a couple of animals ever.” Since December, Kajiura has fitted transmitters on about a dozen sharks. Their signals now can be picked up by undersea listening posts. There are hundreds of such posts along the East Coast. The transmitters send pings through the water and let the scientists know where the sharks are. The pings are so high-pitched that they cannot be heard by fish or other ocean animals. Each transmitter's pings have their own pattern. Because of this, scientists are able to spot and track a particular shark. “We’re interested in what these sharks are doing when they’re here, and we’re interested in their movements,” he said. “Where are they going when they leave? How far up the coast do they go?”