While filming a TV reality show, fisherman off California's coast caught a huge mako. But did they have to kill it, some shark lovers ask. Wouldn't just a picture be good enough? HUNTINGTON BEACH, Calif. — “Yeehaw!” the sport fishermen yelled when they saw the fins above the gray water off Huntington Beach. The chopped mackerel and sardines had worked as bait. The fight was on. The cameras were running. The men on the boat were part of a reality TV show called “The Professionals.” They hooked the giant mako shark. Then Texan Jason Johnston got strapped down to reel it in. He battled the beast for 2-1/2 hours. The shark swam almost a mile, thrashing and jumping 20 feet in the air. The fishermen finally pulled it to the side of the boat and tied it up with a steel cable. Once they had the shark weighed, they realized the catch may have broken a record. The shark weighed 1,323.5 pounds. The men posed next to the steely blue fish and opened its jaws, showing its dagger-sharp rows of teeth to the cameras. They breathlessly told how they could have ended up as “lunch” or “at the bottom of the sea.” But plenty of people wondered why they had to kill such a magnificent animal. Wouldn’t just pulling it close and photographing it have been enough? Ben Ahadpour owns the marina the fisherman used. He said the captain of the boat, Matt Potter, knew the dock rules said you could not bring in sharks. “He shouldn’t have done that,” Ahadpour said. “They can bring it up close, take a picture and let the shark go.” David McGuire, the director of a group that fights for the protection of sharks, was shocked. So many shows about sharks focus on the terror rather than the science, he complained. “These kind of reality shows are not reality. The reality is we’re overfishing sharks, and this macho big-game attitude should be a relic of the past.” Keith Poe tags and releases sharks for conservation groups. He said that most people release sharks these days, but might keep one if it seems like it might be a record breaker. “The general sportfishing community would say it’s acceptable.” Potter, whose nickname is “Mako Matt,” does not buy any of the criticism. “It’s just like any other fishing. The state limit for mako is two per person per day.” Jack Vitek of the International Game Fish Association said the catch was “enormous.” Never mind catching such a shark – just seeing a fish weighing more than 1,000 pounds was rare, he said. And the shortfin mako is a really hard to catch because it is very fast. Makos are common off the coast of Southern California. Young sharks live there. They tend to stay in the open ocean and do not scare swimmers and surfers by coming into the surf zone like great whites do. Makos typically eat small fish. They move on to larger fish as they get older, said biologist Nick Wegner. They are some of the fastest sharks in the ocean, which makes the catch all the more interesting, he said. Makos can warm up their bodies, making their muscles move faster. Wegner said some of his coworkers want to collect samples to learn more about the fish. The shark was probably a female based on its size, he said; male makos typically only reach 500 to 600 pounds. His coworkers are particularly interested in the shark’s DNA and stomach contents. Though the sharks typically eat fish, a small seal baby was once found in a captured mako’s stomach. Professor Chris Lowe also sees a rare opportunity, particularly if the shark was pregnant. One of his students hopes to get samples of the shark’s liver and those of its babies, if there are any. They will check the liver to measure pollution levels. The scientists said the mako population is stable and did not have scientific concerns about the catch. “It’s always good to know that those big sharks are out there,” Wegner said. “On a personal level, it makes me a little sad to take such a big animal out of the ocean.”