Fishermen off California's coast caught by line a record-size mako shark. But, conservationists ask, did this magnificent creature have to die for the cameras? HUNTINGTON BEACH, Calif. — “Yeehaw!” the sport fishermen yelled when they saw the fins slice the gray channel water off Huntington Beach. The chopped mackerel and sardines had worked. The fight was on and so were the cameras. The six men had sped out in the June gloom Monday morning for more than a day of fun. They were filming a reality show called “The Professionals” for the Outdoor Channel. They say they hooked a giant mako shark and Jason Johnston, from Mesquite, Texas, got in the pole harness to reel it in. He grunted and slipped and slid for 2-1/2 hours as the beast swam almost a mile, thrashing and jumping 20 feet in the air. They finally pulled it to the side of the boat and tied it up with a steel cable. By the time they hauled it to Huntington Harbour and had it weighed at a processing plant south of Los Angeles, they realized they appeared to have broken a record for the largest mako to be caught by line, 1,323.5 pounds. The men posed next to the cobalt blue fish and opened its jaws, revealing its dagger-sharp rows of teeth to the cameras. They breathlessly recounted how, if anything went wrong, they would have ended up as “lunch” or “at the bottom of the sea.” Johnston described it to one television reporter as “a gigantic nightmare looking to reap horrible terror on anything it comes across.” One of earth’s most mythologized creatures still manages to stir humans’ imaginations, scratching that ancient urge to bring in a monster. And many people are afraid of sharks. But even before it became clear that the catch was for a reality show, plenty of people wondered why those fishermen really had to kill such a magnificent animal. Wouldn’t just pulling it close and photographing it have been enough? Ben Ahadpour, who owns the marina the fishermen left from, said the captain of the boat, Matt Potter, knew the dock rules prohibited bringing in sharks. “He shouldn’t have done that,” Ahadpour said. “They could have done a catch and release. They can bring it up close, take a picture and let the shark go.” David McGuire, the director of Shark Stewards, a San Francisco Bay Area nonprofit that advocates for the protection of sharks, said he was shocked. “It’s really something you see more in Florida than in California, where we have more of a conservation ethic,” he said. “People should be viewing these sharks as wonderful animals that are important to the ocean and admiring how beautiful they are.” He lamented that so many shows about sharks continue to evoke "Jaws"-like terror rather than science. “These kind of reality shows are not reality. The reality is we’re overfishing sharks, and this macho big-game attitude should be a relic of the past.” Keith Poe, a sport fisherman who tags and releases sharks for conservationists, said that most people release sharks these days, but might keep a potential record breaker. “The general sportfishing community would say it’s acceptable.” Potter, whose nickname is “Mako Matt,” does not buy any of the criticism, adding that he unloaded the shark at a public dock not the marina. “It’s just like any other fishing. The state limit for mako is two per person per day.” Jack Vitek, the world records coordinator for the International Game Fish Association, said the catch was “enormous.” He said that just seeing a fish weighing more than 1,000 pounds, much less catching one, was rare. And the shortfin mako is a particularly difficult quarry because of its unusual speed. The Florida-based group has tracked world-record catches since 1939 though some of its big catches date to the 1860s. Vitek said that if Monday’s haul checks out, it would break the standing mako record set in July 2001, when a 1,221-pound shark was hauled in off the coast of Chatham, Mass. The largest fish catch on record was a 2,664-pound great white shark reeled in off the coast of Australia in 1959. Makos are common off the coast of Southern California, which is considered a nursery ground for the young sharks. They tend to stay in the open ocean and do not scare swimmers and surfers by coming into the surf zone like great whites do. Makos typically eat small fish and move on to larger fish as they get older, said Nick Wegner, a biologist. They are some of the fastest sharks in the ocean, which makes the catch all the more interesting, he said. Unlike most fish, makos can warm up their core body temperatures, making their muscles move faster. Wegner said some of his colleagues had contacted the fishermen who caught the shark, hoping to collect samples to learn more about the fish. The shark was probably a female based on its size, he said; male makos typically max out at 500 to 600 pounds. His colleagues are particularly interested in the shark’s DNA and stomach contents. Though the sharks typically feed off fish, a small seal pup was once found in a captured mako’s stomach, indicating they have other food sources. At California State University, Long Beach, marine biology professor Chris Lowe also sees a rare opportunity, particularly if the shark was pregnant, as photos of it seemed to indicate. One of his graduate students, Kady Lyons, hopes to get tissue samples of the shark’s liver and those of its pups, if there are any, to measure levels of pollution. “We can get an idea of where they’re encountering these contaminants and how much they pass on to their young,” he said. The scientists described the mako population as stable and did not express scientific concerns about the catch. “It’s always good to know that those big sharks are out there,” Wegner said. “On a personal level, it makes me a little sad to take such a big animal out of the ocean.”