The animals are fitted with transmitters so researchers can track their migration movements. FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. — On a boat off Singer Island, Stephen Kajiura and a crew of students set out baited hooks for sharks. Thousands of blacktip sharks come within yards of South Florida’s beaches during their winter migrations. Kajiura, a biologist who teaches at Florida Atlantic University, is catching them and implanting transmitters that allow scientists to track their movements. The sharks migrate from as far away as North Carolina, coming here for the winter, along with schools of mullet and other fish they eat. Kajiura said it is important to understand the extent and range of their migrations because of the sharks’ significant impact on South Florida’s marine environment. Sharks are very effective predators and prevent the populations of certain types of fish from growing too large. When there are too many of the kinds of fish sharks eat, such as mullet, the balance of ocean life can be disrupted. Mullet and other shark prey eat smaller, plant-eating fish, and when their numbers grow too large, there can end up being too few of the plant-eating fish. With too few plant-eating fish around, algae can become overgrown and fragile coral reefs might be damaged. Kajiura, who has been studying shark migration since 2011, said its patterns are closely tied to water temperature. South Florida, Kajiura said, is now the endpoint of the sharks' annual migration. “As global temperatures continue to rise, their preferred temperature may be found not here but farther north," he added. "Maybe a decade or two down the road, we’re not going to have these tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands of top predators cleaning out the reefs. What’s going to happen then?” Since December, Kajiura has been flying in a small plane from the southern end of Miami Beach to Jupiter Inlet to survey blacktip numbers and locations. Based on what he has seen so far, the densest concentrations run from Dania Beach to Lighthouse Point and then from Boynton Inlet to Jupiter. Few sharks could be seen from Boca Inlet to Boynton Inlet. Blacktip sharks, which typically grow to 5 or 6 feet, are among the most-common species to bite people. These are usually non-life-threatening incidents, however, in which the shark clamps down on a hand or foot in murky water and quickly lets go once it realizes it has not bitten down on a fish. Last year, during the late March migration, two people suffered bites — a man on a kiteboard off Delray Beach and a 9-year-old boy on a surfboard or boogie board off North Palm Beach. Neither bite was life-threatening. On a Tuesday morning off John D. MacArthur Beach State Park, Kajiura and his three students set out to hook sharks and fit them with audio transmitters, each of which gives off a unique pattern of high-pitched pings. Although the boat was rocking steeply, they successfully set out 60 hooks on a quarter-mile line held up by buoys. The hooks were baited with hunks of mackerel and fish heads. After an hour, they began hauling up the line. The team managed to catch two sharks, but the trip still ended up being a failure. Normally, when they catch a shark, they implant a transmitter immediately and send the animal on its way. But because the water was so rough, Kajiura decided to head to deeper, smoother water before doing the surgery required to implant a transmitter. So they tied the two sharks to the bow and waited until they had hauled up the line before heading into deeper water. One shark escaped before they could start working on it. The other was successfully implanted with the transmitter but swam away so weakly after being released that Kajiura donned flippers and a mask and dove into the water to check on it. After a minute or two, he swam toward the boat, hauling the shark with one arm. A few minutes later, it was dead, killed by the stress of its encounter with people. “That’s very rare,” Kajiura said. “Ninety-eight percent of the time, the sharks get away just fine — we’ve only lost a couple of animals ever.” The shark was placed on the boat to be brought back for analysis of its stomach contents, as well as for students to study its anatomy. Since December, Kajiura has fitted transmitters on about a dozen sharks. Their signals now can be picked up by the hundreds of undersea listening posts that are situated along the East Coast. Kajiura's lab currently operates listening posts off Singer Island, Lake Worth and South Beach Park in Boca Raton. It will soon add stations at Dania Beach and Juno Beach. The pings the transmitters give off are so high-pitched that they are inaudible to the ocean's fish and marine mammals. Because each transmitter's pings have a unique pattern, the receivers are able to record the presence of a particular shark. “We’re interested in what these sharks are doing when they’re here, and we’re interested in their movements,” he said. “Where are they going when they leave? How far up the coast do they go?”