Water temps and waste affect sharks Waters off the coast of California have more sharks than usual this year. In Southern California, great white sharks have begun to arrive. They spent the winter in the waters off Baja California, a state on the west coast of Mexico. Leanne Ericson of Vista, California, is 35 years old. A shark bit her leg as she swam off San Onofre State Beach in San Diego, California. She was seriously injured. Chris Lowe teaches biology at California State University in Long Beach, California. Biology is the study of living things. Lowe runs a center at the university to study sharks called the Shark Lab. He said the shark that attacked Ericson was probably not an adult. It probably attacked her by mistake. Typically, young great white sharks eat fish and rays. Rays are flat, bony sea creatures. They have long tails they can use to wound an enemy or inject poison into it.  Lowe said young sharks don't know how to chase down big creatures. Adult great white sharks eat sea lions and other large sea animals. They find them off islands such as Catalina and San Nicholas, Lowe said. It’s not known exactly where the mothers give birth. We do know their babies immediately head toward the shore once they’re born. The sharks are normally near Southern California’s shores between May and October. Last year, the water was warmer because of El Niño. This kept the sharks here longer into the winter. They came back earlier in the spring too. Normally, in the winter, strong winds blow from east to west across the waters of the Pacific. This stirs up cold water from deep in the ocean. That cold water rises to the surface. It makes sharks swim away to warmer waters until the summer. That does not happen during an El Niño, though. The usual winds slow down, or might stop completely. This stops the cold water from rising. When the water is warmer because of El Niño, sharks may stick around longer.  Some of the 2- and 3-year-old sharks are here again earlier this year. Lowe is not sure why, since it is not an El Niño year.  “Maybe it just wasn’t cold enough to move those migrations. We just don’t know what’s going on this year,” Lowe said. ![Scientists are not sure why great white sharks got to California early this year. Image: Newsela Staff. [click to expand]](https://media.newsela.com/article_media/extra/sharks.jpg) That’s not the only shark mystery this year, though. For weeks now, in the San Francisco Bay Area, in Northern California, a large number of leopard sharks and bat rays have died. Leopard sharks are large, slender sharks with spotted markings which live in fairly shallow waters near the coast.  Seal life experts are worried about the sudden die-off.  Some scientists think they know what is causing the sea animals to die. For years, garbage and chemical waste was jammed in Bay Area storm drains and waterways. Scientists believe that the trash and chemicals finally washed into the bay after heavy storms this winter. The dirt and chemicals are killing sea creatures.  Along the Northern California coast, man-made gates close during high tide to prevent flooding during a storm. The sharks and bat rays may have been trapped when the gates closed. They had no way to escape the trash and chemicals flowing into the water. In Southern California, however, the shark population is doing well. On Thursday, Orange County Sheriff’s Sgt. Steve Marble said the harbor patrol in Dana Point spotted a group of four 6- to 8-foot great whites near the Southern California beach.  There tends to be some panic after a shark attack. Lowe says the coastline is safe, though. When young sharks have attacked, it has mostly been a swimmer who went far out in the water. They mistake the swimmer for food.  “It’s not something that happens every day,” he said.