California coast visitors are now 91 percent less likely to be bitten by a great white shark than they were in 1950, likely because beach populations of humans have risen dramatically Swimmers in North Carolina were bitten by sharks a record number of times this summer. However, that does not mean that the risk of getting bitten by a shark is getting worse in North Carolina or anywhere else in the world. In fact, a new study focused on California suggests that the risk might be dropping globally. California coast visitors are now 91 percent less likely to be bitten by a great white shark than they were in 1950, the new study claims. That is despite the fact that actual shark bites have increased, from 0.9 per year in the 1950s to 1.5 per year in the decade from 2004 to 2013. How does that work? There are now a whole lot more people in the water. "Even if the number of attacks has increased since the 1950s, the number of people engaging in ocean activities has increased much faster over the same period of time, resulting in a reduction of the individual probability of suffering an attack," said Francesco Ferreti, lead author of the study. The same pattern is playing out in North Carolina. "The population has been going up and the number of people going in the water is always increasing," said Chuck Bangley, a shark researcher at East Carolina University. North Carolina is setting near-record numbers for people at the beach this year, in part due to a heat wave that coincided with schools letting out for summer. More than 6.5 million people visited the North Carolina coast in 2014, an 18 percent increase in visitation since 2010. The risk of being bitten by a shark is already incredibly low, Bangley said. It is far less likely than drowning, for example. However, “the more people you have going into the water, the better the odds are that something bad is going to happen.” While Ferreti's study focuses on California, the basic conclusions almost certainly apply throughout the world. Human population has increased across the globe and there has been an even greater global increase in commercial and recreational use of the ocean, Ferreti said. Meanwhile, a study in 2013 found that humans kill an average 100 million sharks annually across the world. For the new California study, the researchers used data from the Global Shark Attack File (GSAF). The GSAF, which goes back to the 1930s, records shark bites across the world. The scientists assumed that the likelihood of a shark biting a person it encounters remained constant. Thus it was a matter of analyzing changes over time in the number of people and sharks in the same area of water. Ferreti’s team estimated the changing numbers of surfers and divers by looking at surfing events and the annual number of scuba diving days. They estimated changes in the number of swimmers over the past 60 years by looking at data on beach tourism and area population growth. Much research has documented the decline of shark populations across the world, though it is unclear whether that is the case for white sharks in California. What is clear is that the number of scuba divers, surfers and beachgoers has exploded in California over the past six decades. For example, Ferreti and his team estimate that surfers increased nearly 125-fold, from 7,000 in 1950 to 872,000 in 2013, while scuba divers increased more than 200-fold. Overall, the number of annual visits by all beachgoers tripled, from 53 million in the 1950s to 165 million today. Given the more modest increase in shark bites over that time, the scientists concluded that the risk of an attack has actually declined. The rate dropped 2.4 percent per year, translating to a 91.2 percent drop over the full time period. The risk varies by activities. For swimmers, the risk of a bite in 2013 was 1 per 738 million beach visits, a drop of 81.5 percent since 1950. Although the risk for surfers did not drop, their likelihood of a shark bite has remained steady at 1 in 17 million. For scuba divers, the risk was 1 in 1.44 million in 2013, a drop of 99.7 percent since 1962. The reason for the reduction in shark attacks remains unclear. It is likely related to the fact that many species have declined 50 percent to more than 90 percent over the past several decades worldwide. The decline is primarily due to overfishing. "We're killing 10 million sharks for every 1 that kills us," shark researcher George Burgess said. Understanding the factors influencing shark behavior can help humans adjust our behavior to avoid bites, Burgess said. "We're the animals with the brains, they're the ones with the teeth, and we're in their house," he said. It is up to us "to adjust our behavioral patterns and not to expect the animals, be they sharks, jellyfish or whatever, to adjust theirs." A smart practice for humans in the sea is to stay away from seal and sea lion colonies, as sharks prey on both animals. It is also wise to avoid fishing piers, which tend to attract populations of sharks hanging around for scraps. Avoiding schools of fish can also reduce the risk of a shark bite. Most bites are actually cases of mistaken identity: surfers look similar to the pinnipeds that great whites primarily feed on. In North Carolina, bull sharks and blacktips are most likely mistaking a human foot or hand for the foot-long bait fish they usually go after. "If you see predator-prey interactions in front of you, get out of the water," Bangley said. "When you're in the ocean, that's where the shark is supposed to be. It's a wilderness experience just like walking in the woods where you might encounter a bear."