Snow leopard conservation takes on new urgency. Sometimes heads of state are defenders of wildlife. Since taking office in 2011, the current president of Kyrgyzstan, Almazbek Atambayev, has turned his country into a center of snow leopard conservation and research. Perhaps the best symbols of Atambayev’s commitment to snow leopards are recent photos showing the elusive, high-altitude predator roaming Shamshy Wildlife Reserve. Just two years ago, Shamshy allowed in high-paying trophy hunters looking to bag ibex goats. Today, it is protecting these prey animals, on which snow leopards depend. “We are certain about the presence of at least one, perhaps two snow leopards,” Koustubh Sharma, the senior regional ecologist at the Snow Leopard Trust, said. “The second snow leopard we are not sure about given a slightly blurry image.” A couple of snow leopards might not sound like much. However, with a declining global population numbering only in the thousands, each one counts. Indeed, the images from Shamshy are also the first confirmation of snow leopards in the 282-mile-long Kyrgyz Ala-Too mountain range that runs north-south through almost the entirety of Kyrgyzstan. Shamshy Wildlife Range spreads across nearly 77 square miles in the Kyrgyz Ala-Too. However, even this is barely enough to protect a single roaming snow leopard. Recent research has shown that male snow leopards range over 77 square miles and females some 50 square miles. “Shamshy itself is too small to be a full home range for a snow leopard, but it can certainly be a part of one,” Sharma said. The new protected area is co-managed by the Kyrgyz government, local communities and various conservation groups, including the Snow Leopard Trust. They all share responsibilities, including training and paying wildlife rangers, and supporting research efforts, education programs for locals and eco-tourism. “Shamshy has a bit of everything," said Kuban Jumabai uulu, the director of the Snow Leopard Foundation Kyrgyzstan. "The terrain gradually changes from lush meadows and thick forests along a crystal clear stream to grassland, and finally to steep, rocky peaks covered in glaciers.” Shamshy is also home to wild pigs, badgers, marmots, red fox, lynx and wolves. As a part of the agreement, local people are allowed to graze livestock in Shamshy, but are regulated and monitored. Snow leopards are currently categorized as an endangered species. They are threatened by a widespread decline in their prey, by killings by locals who often view them as pests, and most seriously, by poaching. A recent report from the conservation group TRAFFIC found that hundreds of snow leopards are killed to feed the illegal wildlife trade every year. It is doubtful the big cats could survive long under such circumstances. At the same time, debate continues over just how many snow leopards still exist. The estimate is just 4,080 to 6,590 animals throughout the world. Recent research suggests that number might be widely underestimated. “Previous estimates of snow leopard populations were really just guesstimates based on early assumptions about overall range and a general sense of density,” researcher Peter Zahler said. “As research continues to provide better information … we are slowly getting a better sense of numbers.” Zahler and his team have come up with a new estimate of 4,700 to 8,700 individuals across just 44 percent of snow leopard range. This means the total global population could be much larger than previously believed. However, Zahler insists that a higher number of animals does not mean the snow leopard is any less threatened or that its population is not declining. It only means that there could have always been more cats than humans realized. He pointed to the TRAFFIC report as proof enough for ongoing vigilance. “Really the only way to adequately protect snow leopards in these remote mountains is to directly involve local communities in those protection efforts,” he said. Still, Zahler describes himself as “very hopeful” for the long-term survival of the snow leopard. “Unlike the tiger, which has lost something like 97 percent of its range in the last century, the snow leopard’s high-mountain environment is still relatively intact,” he said. The snow leopard is also doing much better than the African lion, which has seen "a 40 percent population decline in the past 20 years," Zahler said. The snow leopard, "if declining, does not seem to be doing so at anywhere near the same rate.” Zahler also noted that the snow leopard's prey populations can bounce back quickly if given the chance. In addition, efforts to save the snow leopard, such as Shamshy, are growing rapidly. Climate change remains a wild card here, according to Zahler. Global warming is expected to hit the high Himalayan region hard, especially in terms of glacier melt. However, it is difficult to say how that will affect snow leopards and their prey. “There are so many variables … that predictions are hard,” Zahler said. Other concerns remain, including the fact that 40 percent of protected areas in snow leopard territory are too small to house a mating pair of leopards — including Shamshy. Nonetheless, such reserves remain important for the species if they connect to other suitable and protected habitat. Still, unlike many of the world’s species, snow leopards have entire organizations devoted to their long-term survival and champions in high places. In 2013, President Atambayev convened the world’s first ever Snow Leopard Conservation Forum, which brought together all 12 countries with snow leopards in their boundaries to discuss conservation and research efforts. A follow-up conference is scheduled for this year. Atambayev deserves praise for "mainstreaming snow leopard conservation," Koustubh Sharma said. If more heads of state reacted similarly, the outlook for the world’s wildlife might be much brighter.