Snow leopard conservation takes on new urgency. The snow leopard has a high-ranking defender. Since taking office in 2011, the president of Kyrgyzstan, Almazbek Atambayev, has worked hard to protect the big cats. Recently, the elusive mountain predators have been photographed roaming Kyrgyzstan's Shamshy Wildlife Reserve. Just two years ago, Shamshy allowed high-paying trophy hunters into the reserve to bag ibex goats. Today, the reserve is protecting the ibex because snow leopards depend on them for food. “We are certain about the presence of at least one, perhaps two snow leopards,” said Koustubh Sharma of the Snow Leopard Trust. “The second snow leopard we are not sure about given a slightly blurry image.” A couple of snow leopards might not sound like much. However, with a declining global population numbering only in the thousands, each one is important. Indeed, the images from Shamshy are also the first confirmed sightings of snow leopards anywhere along the Kyrgyz Ala-Too mountain range. Kyrgyz Ala-Too runs north-to-south for 282 miles, through almost all of Kyrgyzstan. Shamshy Wildlife Range spreads across nearly 77 square miles in the Kyrgyz Ala-Too. However, even this is barely enough to protect a single roaming snow leopard. Recent research has shown that male snow leopards will range over 77 square miles. Typically, females cover a smaller area of around 50 square miles. “Shamshy itself is too small to be a full home range for a snow leopard," Sharma said. "But it can certainly be a part of one.” The new protected area is co-managed by the Kyrgyz government, local communities and various conservation groups, including the Snow Leopard Trust. They share various responsibilities such as training and paying wildlife rangers and supporting research efforts, education programs for locals and eco-tourism. “Shamshy has a bit of everything," said Kuban Jumabai uulu, the director of the Snow Leopard Foundation Kyrgyzstan. It ranges from "lush meadows and thick forests" to "steep, rocky peaks covered in glaciers.” Shamshy is also home to wild pigs, badgers, marmots, red fox, lynx and wolves. Under the new agreement set up to protect the snow leopard, local people are allowed to graze livestock in Shamshy. However, they are regulated and monitored. Snow leopards are currently listed as an endangered species. They are threatened by poaching and by a widespread decline in their prey. Also. locals often view the animals as pests and kill them. Poaching is probably the most serious problem. A recent report found that every year, hundreds of snow leopards are killed to feed the illegal wildlife trade. It is doubtful the big cats could survive for long under such conditions. Researcher Peter Zahler has studied the snow leopard. Despite the serous threats it faces, Zahler said he is “very hopeful” about the animal's long-term chances. Unlike the tiger, which has lost "something like 97 percent of its range," the snow leopard’s high-mountain environment is still relatively unchanged, he said. The snow leopard is also doing much better than the African lion. African lions have seen "a 40 percent population decline in the past 20 years," Zahler said. The snow leopard population may be falling, he said, but not at anywhere near the same rate. Zahler also noted that the populations of animals that snow leopards hunt can bounce back quickly if given the chance. In addition, Shamshy's program is not the only effort to save the snow leopard. Similar programs are springing up rapidly. Climate change remains a wild card, though, according to Zahler. Global warming is expected to hit the high Himalayan mountain region hard, especially in terms of glacier melt. However, it is difficult to say what effect that will have on snow leopards and their prey. There are other serious concerns. For example, 40 percent of protected areas in snow leopard territory are too small to house a mating pair of leopards — including Shamshy. Nonetheless, such reserves remain important for the species if they connect to other suitable and protected habitat. Still, unlike many of the world’s species, snow leopards have entire organizations devoted to making sure they survive. They also have a few champions in high places. In 2013, President Atambayev organized the world’s first ever Snow Leopard Conservation Forum. It brought together representatives from all 12 countries with snow leopards in their boundaries to discuss conservation and research efforts. A follow-up meeting is scheduled for this year. Atambayev deserves praise for "mainstreaming snow leopard conservation," Sharma said. If more heads of state did the same, the outlook for the world’s wildlife might be much brighter.