Researchers in Russia are using hidden cameras to take a population count of the number of snow leopards roaming in the wild. The snow leopard is so rare and elusive that it’s commonly known as the “ghost of the mountains.” But researchers in the Altai Mountains, where the borders of Russia, Mongolia, Kazakhstan and China converge, are increasingly coming face to face with this endangered animal through a growing network of camera traps. On a recent day in Sailyugem National Park in Russia’s Altai Republic, rangers in ski goggles and huge parkas were retrieving footage from a high-altitude camera trap. The black box holds a dozen AA batteries, a memory card and a motion-activated lens. It is nestled among a cluster of dark burgundy rocks covered with orange and green fungus. Such windswept ridges are where snow leopards typically travel in search of prey such as ibex and musk deer. They sneak down from above to break the victim’s neck with one crunch of their powerful jaws. “When camera traps appeared recently it was a huge boost because scientists got their hands not just on footprints but on photographs of the leopard itself," said the park’s assistant director, Denis Malikov. He said this allows scientists to identify individuals and their area of distribution.  No one knows how many snow leopards are in Russia. But poaching and illegal traps are thought to have reduced the population to fewer than 70 out of a global population of at least 4,700.  About 40 researchers from a number of groups, including the World Wildlife Fund, national parks and state wildlife protection authorities are conducting the first-ever nationwide snow leopard census. They hope that exact information about the snow leopard population will highlight the need for conservation measures such as expanding protected areas. The footage the camera traps provide is the closest look yet at a creature that resides in some of the most remote and hard-to-reach mountains in the world. In Sailyugem, winter temperatures can drop below minus 49 degrees Fahrenheit and there are no roads besides a few dirt tracks. Rangers drive jeeps and four-wheelers along the rocky frozen rivers at the bottom of each valley and hike up steep mountainsides on horseback or by foot to reach far-flung snow leopard habitats. Earlier population estimates were educated guesses at best. Scientists would survey an area for signs of snow leopards, such as paw prints. They would use this data to make an estimate of how many lived in that area. But this method is prone to error. The camera traps allow them to identify individuals by the unique pattern of rosettes, or black and brown spots, found on each leopard’s thick coat of white, grey or pale tan fur. As an example, Malikov showed footage of a snow leopard the staff have dubbed Khan. “He’s the dominant male. He looks like a confident animal; look how he passes by the camera trap,” Malikov said. Modern camera traps were first brought to Altai in 2010, by Rodney Jackson, an American leopard expert. Since then, the World Wildlife Fund has been periodically donating them to local parks and researchers. More than 180 camera traps in the Altai and nearby Sayan Mountains are now monitoring leopards and other wildlife. An additional 50 cameras are scheduled to be installed by the end of the year. Leopards are frequently recorded marking their territory by scraping out small holes and leaving urine, excrement or scent-sprays. They often come up to sniff the camera. A camera trap in the nearby region of Buryatia caught a snow leopard calling potential mates with a hoarse bellow. “They’re very curious,” said Alexander Karnaukhov, a World Wildlife Fund biologist. “They don’t fear camera traps or human tracks.” Leopards can also be distinguished through DNA analysis of excrement, such as the small dropping that the lead tracker and wolf hunter Valery Orgunov recently discovered in the snow near leopard prints. “He’s like the boss here,” Orgunov said, showing how a leopard claw had scratched four lines into a red stone. The snow leopard is a sacred animal for the Altai people, who consider it to be the guardian of the ancestral spirits that they worship, according to Maya Erlinbayeva. She is an educational specialist at Sailyugem National Park.  But poverty and economic turmoil in the 1990s drove some locals to kill snow leopards for their pelts. The hunting has declined, thanks in part to a harsher punishment of up to seven years in prison. But the simple snares, traps set for musk deer, frequently catch snow leopards instead. Rangers often find dozens of snares during expeditions into the park’s Argut river valley and say this is the main threat to snow leopards in Russia. Worldwide, an estimated 221-450 snow leopards are killed each year for trade. “Most snow leopard and musk deer habitats in Siberia coincide, so the irbis [snow leopard] gets caught in snares set for musk deer,” Karnaukhov said. “In most cases it dies; as a rule it’s a long and torturous death.” Another potential danger is climate change, which some local sheep and yak herders say is making the weather here more unsettled. Experts worry that large snowfalls will grow more frequent. This could prevent animals such as ibex and argali from grazing, and deprive snow leopards of their prey. In addition, the thawing of permafrost soil has been infecting hoofed mammals with diseases. These are then passed up the food chain, a World Wildlife Fund study of climate change in China found. Snow leopards there have been killed by these diseases, it said. Alexey Kokorin, a climate expert at the World Wildlife Fund, said change is necessary. “If we better protect the snow leopard from poaching,” he said, “then we will raise its ability to adapt to climate change.”