Researchers in Russia are using hidden cameras to take a population count of the number of snow leopards roaming in the wild. The snow leopard is a rare and mysterious animal. It is even known as the “ghost of the mountains.” However, researchers are increasingly coming "face to face" with this endangered animal. They are accomplishing this through a growing network of cameras.  Sailyugem National Park is in Russia. It is located in a mountain range that stretches across several countries. On a recent day, rangers in ski goggles and huge parkas were retrieving footage from a camera trap high in the mountains. The camera trap is a black box that holds batteries and a memory card. It also contains a lens that is activated by motion. It is tucked into a rocky ridge where snow leopards typically travel in search of food. They sneak down from above to catch their prey. It takes just one crunch of their powerful jaws to break an animal's neck. Denis Malikov is the park's assistant director. He said when the camera traps appeared, it was a huge boost for scientists. "Scientists got their hands not just on footprints but on photographs of the leopard itself," he said.    No one knows how many snow leopards are in Russia. But it's believed that poaching, killing them illegally to sell their fur, has reduced the population to fewer than 70\. This is out of a global population of around 4,700\. Scientists are now conducting the first-ever nationwide count of snow leopards.   Footage from the camera traps provides the closest look yet at snow leopards in their natural habitat. The creatures live in some of the most remote and hard-to-reach mountains in the world. In Sailyugem, winter temperatures can drop below minus 49 degrees Fahrenheit. There are no roads besides a few dirt tracks. It is very difficult for rangers to reach the animals. Scientists used to estimate the leopard's population using paw prints. But this method is not exact. The camera traps allow them to identify individuals by the patterns on their fur. Snow leopards have spots on their thick coats of white, grey or pale tan fur. Each one's markings are a little bit different, like human fingerprints.  As an example, Malikov showed footage of a snow leopard the staff calls Khan. “He’s the dominant male," Malikov said. "He looks like a confident animal. Look how he passes by the camera trap." Modern camera traps were first brought to the region in 2010\. Today, there are more than 180 devices monitoring the area. There are 50 more scheduled to arrive by the end of the year. Leopards mark their territory. They may scrape out small holes and leave urine, excrement or scent-sprays. They often come up to sniff the camera. One camera trap caught a snow leopard calling out for mates. Experts say the snow leopard is a sacred animal for the locals. However, economic trouble in the 1990s drove some of them to kill the animals for their fur. The hunting has declined, thanks in part to harsher prison sentences. Today, the main threat to snow leopards may be the traps that are set up to hunt other animals.  Another possible danger to snow leopards is climate change. Experts worry that large snowfalls will become more frequent. This could prevent animals such as ibex and argali from grazing. Snow leopards could lose their prey.   In addition, the thawing of permafrost soil can infect smaller mammals with diseases. These are then passed up the food chain to snow leopards, a World Wildlife Fund study found. Alexey Kokorin is a climate expert at the World Wildlife Fund. He said change is necessary. “If we better protect the snow leopard from poaching, then we will raise its ability to adapt to climate change.”