Snow leopard conservation takes on new urgency. Snow leopards have an important friend. His name is Almazbek Atambayev and he is the president of the Central Asian country of Kyrgyzstan. Since taking office in 2011, Atambayev has worked hard to protect the big mountain cats.  Atambayev's efforts have been paying off. Recently, snow leopards were photographed roaming Kyrgyzstan's Shamshy Wildlife Reserve.  Shamshy was set up to protect wild animals. It used to let in hunters who wanted to hunt ibex goats. Today, that is no longer allowed. The reserve is protecting the ibex because snow leopards depend on them for food. “We are certain about the presence of at least one, perhaps two snow leopards,” Koustubh Sharma said. Sharma works for the Snow Leopard Trust, a group that is trying to protect the big cat. A couple of snow leopards might not sound like very many. However, there are only several thousand left in the world, so every new one counts.  The snow leopards spotted in Shamshy are the first seen in years anywhere along the Kyrgyz Ala-Too mountain range. Kyrgyz Ala-Too runs for 282 miles, through almost all of Kyrgyzstan. Shamshy Wildlife Range spreads across nearly 77 square miles in the Kyrgyz Ala-Too range. However, even this is not really enough space to protect a single snow leopard. The animals wander over large areas looking for prey. Male snow leopards roam over areas around 77 square miles in size. The females roam over slightly smaller areas of land. “Shamshy itself is too small to be a full home range for a snow leopard," Sharma said. "But it can certainly be a part” of a bigger one. Kuban Jumabai uulu heads the Kyrgyzstan branch of the Snow Leopard Foundation. Like the Snow Leopard Trust, his group is working to protect the cats.  Shamshy has "a bit of everything," he said. It ranges from lush meadows and thick forests to steep mountains covered with ice and snow.  Snow leopards face various dangers. Some of the wild animals they hunt are dying off. People kill the snow leopards to protect their farm animals. However, the most serious problem is unlawful hunting, or poaching. Every year, hundreds of snow leopards are killed by hunters, even though hunting them is against the law.  Scientist Peter Zahler studies snow leopards. Although they are in serious danger, Zahler said he is still “very hopeful” about their chances. Snow leopards are doing much better than tigers, Zahler said. Tigers have lost almost all of their range as cities and towns have spread. Because snow leopards live high up in the mountains, much of their range is still unchanged.  Shamshy's program is not the only effort to save the snow leopard, Zahler said. Other programs have begun as well. Some serious problems remain, though. Almost half of the protected areas in snow leopard territory are too small for a mating pair of leopards. Still, such reserves remain important if they connect to other protected areas. Snow leopards are luckier than many of the world's animals. They have entire groups working to making sure they do not die out.  They also have President Atambayev. In 2013, Atambayev set up the world’s first-ever Snow Leopard Conservation Forum. The meeting brought together officials from all 12 countries with snow leopard populations to discuss ways to save the animal. A follow-up meeting is set for this year. Atambayev deserves praise, Sharma said. He has worked hard to convince other countries that it is important to try to save the snow leopard. If more leaders reacted like Atambayev, the world’s wildlife might have a much brighter future.