Snow leopard conservation takes on new urgency. Snow leopards have an important friend. His name is Almazbek Atambayev. Atambayev is the president of the country of Kyrgyzstan. It is in Central Asia. He became president in 2011\. Since then, he has worked hard to protect the big mountain cats.  The president's work has been helping. Not long ago, snow leopards were photographed in Kyrgyzstan's Shamshy Wildlife Reserve. None had been seen there for years. Shamshy was set up to protect wild animals. It used to allow people in to hunt for ibex goats. That is no longer allowed. Snow leopards eat goats. If there are not enough goats, the snow leopards will not have food. There might be two leopards living in the reserve, said Koustubh Sharma. He works for the Snow Leopard Trust. It is a  group that is trying to protect the big cat.  Two snow leopards might not sound like very many. But there are only several thousand left in the world. Every new cat is important.  The two snow leopards were not just the first seen in the reserve. They were also the first seen anywhere in the country's long mountain range for many years. Snow leopards face many dangers. Some of the wild animals they hunt are dying off. People kill leopards to protect their farm animals.  The most serious problem is hunting. Hunters kill hundreds of snow leopards every year. They do this even though it is against the law.  Scientist Peter Zahler studies snow leopards. They are in serious danger, he said. Still, he is “very hopeful” they will be able to live for a long time. Snow leopards are doing much better than tigers, Zahler said. Tigers have lost almost all of their land. Cities have taken over the land they used to roam.  Snow leopards live high up in the mountains. Much of their land is still unchanged. For that reason, their chance of holding on is much better. Snow leopards also have President Atambayev.  In 2013, Atambayev set up the first Snow Leopard Conservation Forum. It was a meeting for all 12 countries with snow leopards in them. Leaders and scientists talked about ways to save the big cats. A second meeting will happen this year. The world’s wild animals would be doing much better if more leaders were like Atambayev. Many people hope others will follow his example.