Thanks to tags that run on solar power, scientists can get a huge amount of information about the shark and its ocean world. FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. — Some sharks have been hunted and fished too much. Now, the sun might come to their rescue. That's because scientists are using solar power to find out more about the fish. Solar power uses the light from the sun to make energy. Scientists need to track sharks to learn how they move through the ocean. They have started using tags that run on solar power to follow the sharks. That tag can stay on for two years. It gathers information about the shark. The tag uses the sun's energy to beam the information up to satellites. Researchers used to use tags that ran on batteries. But the batteries would sometimes die before researchers could get all the information from the tags. Sharks are very important to the ocean community. But some fishermen catch and kill sharks for their fins, cartilage and meat. Scientists want to make sure there is a healthy number of sharks in the ocean. Marco Flagg works at a company in California. It sells the new tags. He says that the new tags are like a smartphone for animals who live in the sea. The Guy Harvey Research Institute is in Florida. Scientists there want to use solar tags to track certain fish. They want to follow tigers, makos, hammerheads, oceanic white tip and sand sharks. The scientists want to understand how the sharks migrate. They are looking for a pattern in the way the sharks move from one place to another at different times of the year. Antonio Fins runs the Guy Harvey Ocean Foundation. He says that tags have helped scientists discover that sharks like to move around a lot. So much so that they don't belong to just one part of the ocean. Their home is the entire ocean. Solar tags became available about two years ago. About 40 different groups already use them. For instance, the University of Miami studies a variety of sharks using solar tags. Others use the tags to track turtles and marine mammals that spend time in the sun. Marine mammals are warm-blooded creatures that live in the sea. The overall success of solar tags is not yet know. That's because solar tags have not been around for very long. But so far scientists have not run into serious problems. Companies that make and sell the new tag say more and more people are buying them. The tags record how deep the fish go. They measure the temperature of the water the sharks swim in. That information is all useful to scientists. Mahmood Shivji works at a college in Florida. He explained that most sharks don’t hang out near the surface of the ocean in direct sunlight. So scientists have programmed the solar-powered tags to get information for about half a year while running on regular batteries. After that time, the tags float to the surface of the ocean. “Now it’s exposed to sunlight,” Shivji said. It can start beaming back the information it has been storing for six months. 