The solar-powered tags beam up to satellites all the information they've gathered without any worries of the batteries dying. FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. — The sun might give hunted and overfished sharks a new ray of hope. That's because researchers are using solar power to find out more about the fish. Solar power uses light from the sun to create energy. Scientists who study marine life are now using special tags that run on solar power. They use the tags to study a shark’s movements for up to two years. The information from the tag is beamed to satellites using the sun's energy. Researchers used to rely on tags that ran on batteries. Those batteries sometimes died before the information on the tags was passed back to researchers. Sharks are very important to the overall balance of ocean ecosystems. But some fishermen catch and kill sharks by the millions for their fins, cartilage and meat. Marco Flagg works at a California company that sells the solar tags. He says that the new tags are like “a smartphone for marine animals." The Guy Harvey Research Institute is in Florida. Scientists there want to use solar tags to track certain species of the fierce fish. Those fish include tigers, makos, hammerheads, oceanic white tip and sand sharks. The goal is to better understand how the sharks migrate. Scientists want to study the patterns of how they move from place to place at different times of the year. Researchers would also like to keep the shark population at a healthy level. Antonio Fins runs the Guy Harvey Ocean Foundation. “We’ve learned a lot from tagging sharks, not least of which is that they are highly migratory,” he said. “They are not American sharks or Bahamian sharks or Mexican sharks. They don’t know borders or nationalities.” Solar tags became available two years ago. About 40 research agencies already use them. For instance, the University of Miami studies a variety of sharks using solar tags. Others use the tags to track turtles and marine mammals that spend time in the sun. Marine mammals are warm-blooded creatures that live in the sea. The overall success of solar tags is not yet know. That's because solar tags have not been around for very long. But so far scientists have encountered no serious problems. The tags get power from the sun. That power is used to beam to a satellite a range of data or information. That data includes how deep the fish go and the water temperatures they come across. That information is then transmitted to researchers. Mahmood Shivji works at Nova Southeastern University. He explained that most sharks don’t hang out near the surface of the ocean in direct sunlight. So researchers have programmed the solar-powered tags to collect data for about six months while running on regular batteries. After that time, the tags separate and float to the surface. “Now it’s exposed to sunlight,” Shivji said. The tags are able to store a huge amount of information. It takes a while to beam back all the data. If the tags only ran on batteries, they would would probably die before all the information was sent. But Shivji thinks that solar panel tags will be able to transfer all the information collected. But both battery operated and solar tags have helped researchers. Now a lot more is known about how different fish move and swim in the ocean, Shivji said.