Marine scientists use solar-powered tags to track a shark's movements. The tags have many sensors and communication capability, like a smartphone. FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. — Researchers are looking to the sun to give hunted and overfished sharks a new ray of hope. Using a special solar-powered tag, marine scientists now can study a shark’s movements for up to two years by way of data beamed to satellites. Previously, researchers relied on tags that ran on batteries. Those batteries sometimes died before all the information could be transmitted. The new tags are like “a smartphone for marine animals,” said Marco Flagg, CEO of Desert Star, a California company that offers the solar devices. “Just like smartphones, the tags have many sensors and communication capability.” The Guy Harvey Research Institute, based in Dania Beach, Fla., is looking to use the solar tags to track certain species of the fierce fish. Their targets include tigers, makos, hammerheads, oceanic white tip and sand sharks. The goal is to better understand their migratory patterns. Scientists would also like to keep the shark population healthy. Sharks are critical to the overall balance of ocean ecosystems. But commercial fishermen catch and kill sharks by the millions for their fins, cartilage and meat. “We’ve learned a lot from tagging sharks, not least of which is that they are highly migratory,” said Antonio Fins, executive director of the Guy Harvey Ocean Foundation, which supports the institute. “They are not American sharks or Bahamian sharks or Mexican sharks. They don’t know borders or nationalities.” Solar tags were put on the market two years ago. About 40 research agencies already use them. For instance, the University of Miami’s Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences studies a variety of sharks using solar tags. Others use them to track turtles and marine mammals that spend time in the sun. The overall success of solar tags has yet to be proven because of their relatively limited use, but so far marine researchers have encountered no serious problems. Manufacturers say that a growing number of agencies plan to purchase solar tags. By drawing on solar energy, the tags ensure enough power is available to beam to a satellite a range of data or information. That data includes how deep the fish go and the water temperatures they encounter. That information is then transmitted to researchers. Mahmood Shivji works at Nova Southeastern University. He explained that because most sharks don’t linger near the surface — in direct sunlight — the solar-powered tags are programmed to collect data for about six months while running on conventional batteries. After that time, the tags detach and float to the surface. They are called “pop-up archival satellite tags.” “Now it’s exposed to sunlight,” Shivji said, “and it’s been archiving data for six months.” The devices can gather an enormous amount of information, so much that batteries alone would die before all the data is transmitted, Shivji said. “If you have a solar panel, in theory, that tag should be able to transmit 100 percent of its data,” he said. Solar powered or not, tags already have provided researchers with detailed information about fish. They're learning about their migratory patterns and daily habits. From tracking several sharks around the world, “we’ve discovered remarkable data on the behavior of these animals in terms of their movement horizontally as well as vertically,” Shivji said.