Opinion: Act now to save the sharks. SAN JOSE, Calif. – In many ways, we know more about the Moon than we do about the oceans. After all, 12 people have walked on the surface of the Moon, but only three have been to the deepest part of the sea. As we learn more about the Earth's oceans, it is becoming clear that we have caused more damage to them than we realized. A recent study found that fishing catches have been substantially underestimated for years. This should grab the attention of regional fisheries management organizations, which oversee commercial fishing in the high seas. It is also significant news for those monitoring compliance with the United Nations Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS). The CMS is an international environmental treaty that covers endangered migratory species. Such species regularly travel through waters controlled by multiple nations and so they need to be protected by one set of international standards. According to the CMS, great white sharks are badly in need of protection, as are several species closely related to sharks. The latter include five species of sawfish and 11 species of ray.  CMS meetings on migratory sharks are set to take place this month in San Jose, Costa Rica. The meetings represent an important opportunity to ensure the conservation of these species, so that they can continue to fulfill their critical ecological role as apex predators. As apex predators, sharks are among the animals that are at the top of the food chain; they help keep other animal populations from growing too large. In 2010, 39 nations signed the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks. Despite being legally non-binding, the memorandum represents an important attempt to set limits on shark fishing, in order to ensure the health of various shark populations. However, as the recent study on fishing catches underscores, we often lack the accurate data needed to determine what level of consumption is sustainable. Without it, the precautionary principle — if in doubt, don’t do it — should be applied. The problem is that the absence of reliable data can make the need to protect a species seem more abstract and less urgent. The uncertainty and vagueness weaken governments’ capacity to resist other more immediate demands, especially the need to protect the livelihoods of fishermen and others. In the meantime, consumption of the oceans’ resources continues to surge. Over the last two generations, as the world population has doubled to 7.3 billion, the amount of fish taken from the oceans each year has grown even faster, from 20 million metric tons in 1950 to 77 million in 2010\. Furthermore, these are only the official figures. They do not account for illegal, unregulated and unreported catches. While sharks are commercially valuable, few fishing operations are primarily focused on catching them. Instead, most sharks are caught in nets targeting other fish, usually tuna. For that reason, there are few regulations specifically covering sharks. The absence of clear regulation has made it difficult to control the extent of shark fishing. The nets that modern fisheries employ today are massive and the entire process of fishing has become industrialized. Factory ships and modern technologies have enabled the massive scaling up of catches to satisfy demand not only locally, but in distant markets as well. Given this, the addition of so many species to the endangered list in recent years should come as no surprise. Some nations that have signed the Memorandum of Understanding, including certain Pacific island states, have declared their national waters to be shark sanctuaries. These countries have established areas where all fishing is prohibited. For their part, Australia, New Zealand and the United States have begun to develop efforts to monitor and manage fish stocks. Furthermore, there has been an outcry against the wasteful practice of shark finning, in which only the fin — considered the most tasty part of a shark — is harvested. The European Union now requires that all sharks are brought to shore intact, thereby preventing the removal of fins from sharks at sea and the disposal overboard of their less valuable bodies. This has been reinforced by the Chinese government’s pledge not to serve shark fin soup, considered a delicacy, at official banquets. Even freight companies and airlines have been spurred to act. A growing number are now refusing to transport shark fins. While such progress should be applauded, there is a long way to go. For example, efforts must be made to address bycatch, or the trapping of sharks in nets intended for other fish. The key is for all interested parties — from fishermen and conservationists to governments and international bodies — to work together. The negative economic impact of limiting shark fishing is not nearly as large as one might expect. In many cases, it could be more than offset by other kinds of commercial activities that take advantage of live sharks. The thriving ecotourism operations in the Maldives, Kenya, South Africa, Fiji and some Central American and Caribbean countries are a case in point. As a tourist draw, seen at close quarters in its natural setting, a manta ray can be worth thousands of dollars. Dead on a slab on the docks, its flesh and gills fetch a fraction of that amount. The short-term thinking that slows down environmental conservation efforts today could prove devastating; indeed, to some extent, it already has. If we continue to damage critical ecosystems, they will soon become unfixable. Only with an urgent and cooperative effort to preserve marine ecosystems will the oceans be able to continue to feed — and fascinate — the world for generations to come.