Opinion: Sharks face danger from fishing. SAN JOSE, Calif. – We know more about the Moon than we do about the oceans. After all, 12 people have walked on the surface of the Moon, but only three have been to the deepest part of the sea.  As we learn more about the Earth's oceans, the news is not good. It is now becoming clear that we have caused more damage to them than we realized. A recent study found that we have fished the oceans much more heavily than was previously realized. Many marine species may be in danger of disappearing.  The United Nations Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS) is one important attempt to deal with the crisis. The CMS is an international environmental treaty that covers endangered migratory species. Such species regularly travel through waters controlled by many different nations. Because of this, they need to be protected by one set of international standards. According to the CMS, great white sharks are seriously endangered, as are several species closely related to sharks. The latter include five species of sawfish and 11 species of ray.  CMS meetings on migratory sharks are set to take place this month in San Jose, Costa Rica. The meetings represent an important opportunity to ensure the conservation of these species. Sharks need to be preserved so that they can continue to fulfill their critical ecological role as apex predators. Apex predators are at the top of the food chain. They help keep nature in balance by preventing other animal populations from growing too large. In 2010, 39 nations signed the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks. The memorandum document is just an agreement, not a set of binding laws. However, it is an important attempt to set limits on shark fishing, in order to ensure the health of various shark populations. However, we often lack enough accurate information to determine how much fishing can safely be allowed. The absence of reliable information can make the need to protect a species seem less urgent and less real. Governments then more easily give way to calls to not impose limits on fishing. Many people oppose fishing limits because they fear they will lead to lost jobs and income. In the meantime, our consumption of the ocean's fish continues to surge. Over the last two generations, the amount of fish taken from the oceans each year has grown from 20 million metric tons in 1950 to 77 million in 2010\. Furthermore, these are only the official figures. They do not account for unregulated and unreported catches. While sharks are commercially valuable, few fishing operations are primarily focused on catching them. Instead, most sharks are caught in nets targeting other fish, usually tuna. For that reason, there are few regulations specifically covering sharks. The absence of clear regulation has made it difficult to control the extent of shark fishing. The nets that modern fisheries use today are massive and the entire process of fishing has become large scale. Huge ships are harvesting gigantic quantities of fish. Given this, the addition of so many species to the endangered list in recent years should come as no surprise. Some nations that have signed the Memorandum of Understanding have banned shark fishing in their national waters. These countries, which include several Pacific island states, have established areas where all fishing is forbidden. For their part, Australia, New Zealand and the United States have begun to develop efforts to better manage fish stocks. Furthermore, there has been an outcry against the wasteful practice of shark finning. Shark finning is a kind of fishing in which only the fin — considered the tastiest part of a shark — is harvested. The European Union now requires that all sharks are brought to shore whole. The law prevents the slicing off of fins at sea and the disposal overboard of the less valuable shark bodies. Even freight companies and airlines have been spurred to act. A growing number are now refusing to transport shark fins. While such progress should be applauded, there is a long way to go. For example, efforts must be made to address bycatch, or the trapping of sharks in nets intended for other fish. The key is for everyone concerned to work together, including fishermen. While limiting shark fishing could cause some loss of income for the fishing industry, the loss would not be that great. In addition, there is money to be made from commercial activities that take advantage of live sharks. Thriving marine tourism operations in the Maldives, Kenya, South Africa, Fiji and some Central American and Caribbean countries are a case in point. A shark seen in its natural setting can be worth thousands of dollars, as tourists are willing to pay for the experience. Dead on a slab on the docks, it is worth a fraction of that amount. If we continue to damage our oceans, they will soon become ruined beyond repair. We must all work together so that the oceans will be able to continue to feed — and fascinate — the world for generations to come.