Opinion: Save sharks from dying out. SAN JOSE, Calif. – Scientists know less about the oceans than they do about the Moon. After all, 12 people have walked on the surface of the Moon. Only three have been to the deepest part of the sea.  Scientists are now starting to learn more about the Earth's oceans. The news is not good. It turns out we have caused more damage to the oceans than we thought. A new study shows we have fished the oceans much more heavily than anyone realized. Many kinds of fish are in danger of disappearing.  Many of the world's countries have come together to try to deal with the problem. The countries signed a treaty. It is called the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS).  The CMS covers endangered migratory fish. Such fish travel long distances through waters controlled by many different nations. They need to be protected by one set of laws. According to the CMS, several kinds of sharks are seriously endangered. They are in danger of dying out completely unless fishing is controlled.  Sharks might not seem worth saving. After all, they are frightening beasts. In fact, they are very important to the oceans' health. Without these great hunters, there would be too many smaller fish. Sharks help keep nature in balance. Later this month, leaders from many countries will meet in San Jose, Costa Rica. They will try to figure out ways to protect sharks.  In 2010, 39 nations signed the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks. The purpose was to set limits on shark fishing. The countries agreed that only a certain amount of fishing would be allowed. Anything more could cause some kinds of sharks to die out. However, there is one big problem. Scientists simply do not have enough information.  No one really knows how much fishing is going on. No one really knows how many of certain fish are left. For that reason, it is hard to set the right limits. One thing is sure, though. We are fishing more and more. Fishermen today take more than three times as much fish from the oceans each year than they did in 1950.  In part, this is because there are many more people in the world today. Another reason is that modern fishing uses huge nets and giant boats. It is no wonder that so many kinds of fish are now in danger. Some nations no longer allow shark fishing in their national waters. The United States has not gone that far. However, it is beginning to try to figure out how to protect sharks. In some parts of the world, shark finning is no longer allowed. Shark finning is a wasteful kind of fishing in which only the fin is kept. The fin is the tastiest and most expensive part of a shark. Many Asians like to eat it in soups.  In many European countries, all sharks now must be brought to shore whole. The new law stops fishermen from slicing the fins off at sea. Before, they would do that and throw the rest of the body into the ocean.  Now these fishermen are less interested in catching sharks. They do not want to be stuck with the whole body since most of it is not worth much. There is a long way to go, though. Many sharks are still in real danger. To save them, everyone must work together, including fishermen. If we do not act soon, it will be too late.