Spider named for Rowling character Before they became fascinated by a new species of spiders, Javed Ahmed and Rajashree Khalap were fascinated by Harry Potter.  Ahmed first cracked open the books in his teens, and for Khalap, it was in adulthood. They eagerly awaited the release of "Harry Potter and the Cursed Child" and were delighted to see that universe expand in "Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them." The scientific researchers couldn't help drawing a parallel between J.K. Rowling's fictional world and the critters still undiscovered in their own world. That sentiment propelled them into the small, sacred grove in the southwestern Indian state of Karnataka, in the Shivamogga district. A "biodiversity hotspot" had been preserved there for generations by villagers and their ancestors. There in the grove, the scientists, along with Sumukha J. N., found their own "fantastic beasts." One was a spider that looked like a ladybug and another a tiny arachnid that brought their love for Harry Potter full circle. It was shaded brown, triangle-shaped and, Ahmed and Khalap agreed, looked identical to Rowling's mischievous Sorting Hat. The hat is a staple at the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, where Harry Potter and his pals spend most of their time throughout the seven books. Brown and tattered, it is placed on the head of each first-year student. Through a slit in the aged and crumpled crown, the hat shouts out the child's house assignment after a period of pondering. The houses are named after the school's four founders and known for certain defining qualities. One founder, Godric Gryffindor, was the original owner of the Sorting Hat. After the scientists trapped the hat-like spider, examined and dissected it, Ahmed told The Washington Post it became "abundantly clear" they'd discovered a new species. That meant the trio would get to name it, and the tiny brown spider became Eriovixia gryffindori. The three researchers published their findings in the Indian Journal of Arachnology. They included a heartfelt tribute to their name's inspiration, Rowling and her literary works. Ahmed thought the Harry Potter-inspired moniker "would be a wonderful way to draw attention to an oft neglected group" of creatures. Khalap "enthusiastically approved" - and so did Rowling. On Twitter, the author responded to a tweet from Ahmed about the study. "I'm truly honoured!" she wrote. "Congratulations on discovering another #FantasticBeast!" "When I first read the books, I had no idea I would one day end up naming a species, after such an interesting, fun and whimsical character, and be congratulated by Rowling herself," Ahmed said. "It was quite a moment." The team's latest find is the sixth new spider discovery since their research began two years ago. The curious shape of E. gryffindori, which is only 7 mm (1/4 inch) long, allows the spider to camouflage itself among the thick vegetation in the Western Ghats mountains. The peaks stretch for about 990 miles along India's western coast. The Ghats mountain range is home to a wide array of the country's species. It is recognized as one of the world's eight "hottest hotspots" of biological diversity, according to UNESCO, a scientific organization of the United Nations. But the mountains have been threatened by the coffee, tea, rubber and oil palm industries or have been logged, reported Earth Touch News Network. The range was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site, meaning it is a place to be protected, in 2012\. However, illegal logging and hunting still threaten the area. Ahmed told The Post that the sacred grove where the E. gryffindori was discovered has no legal protection. The biodiversity the scientists found there, he said, was "staggering." The grove was home to many "fantastic beasts." In his interview with Earth Touch, Ahmed joked about a different Rowling character, Aragog, an enormous, hairy, talking spider that lives in the Forbidden Forest at Hogwarts. The spider appears in the second book, "Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets." The creature's name translates to "leader of the spiders." Ahmed told Earth Touch the huge spider's name has potential for future discoveries. "We might name another cool spider after Aragog!" he said.