Spider named for Rowling character Before they were scientific researchers, Javed Ahmed and Rajashree Khalap were Harry Potter fans. Ahmed first cracked open the J.K. Rowling books in his teens, and for Khalap, it was as an adult. They eagerly awaited the release of "Harry Potter and The Cursed Child" and were delighted to see that universe expand in "Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them." The scientists couldn't help drawing a parallel between Rowling's fictional world and the critters yet to be discovered in their own world. That feeling sent them into the small, sacred grove in Karnataka, a state in India. A "biodiversity hotspot" had been preserved there for generations by villagers and their ancestors. A wide variety of animals, insects and plants live there.  There the scientists, along with Sumukha J. N., found their own "fantastic beasts." One was a spider that looked like a lady bug and another a tiny spider that brought their love for Harry Potter full circle. The spider was shaded brown, triangle-shaped and, Ahmed and Khalap agreed, looked like Rowling's Sorting Hat. The hat is from the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, where Harry Potter and his pals spend most of their time throughout the seven books. Brown and tattered, it is placed on the head of each first-year student. The hat shouts out the child's house assignment after a period of pondering. The houses are named after the school's four founders and are known for certain defining qualities. One founder, Godric Gryffindor, was the original owner of the Sorting Hat. After the scientists trapped and examined the hat-like spider, Ahmed told The Washington Post it became "abundantly clear" they'd discovered a new species. That meant the three would get to name it. The tiny brown spider became Eriovixia gryffindori. In a study of the spider published in a scientific journal, the three researchers wrote a tribute to Rowling and her works. Ahmed thought the Harry Potter-inspired name "would be a wonderful way to draw attention to an often neglected group" of creatures. Khalap "enthusiastically approved."  So did Rowling. On Twitter, the author responded to a tweet from Ahmed about the study. "I'm truly honoured!" she wrote. "Congratulations on discovering another #FantasticBeast!" "When I first read the books, I had no idea I would one day end up naming a species after such an interesting, fun and whimsical character, and be congratulated by Rowling herself," Ahmed said. "It was quite a moment." It is the sixth new spider discovery since their research began two years ago.  The shape of E. gryffindori, which is only 7 mm (1/4 inch) long, allows the spider to hide among the plants in the Western Ghats mountains. The mountains stretch for about 990 miles along India's western coast. The mountain range is home to a many of the country's species. It is recognized for its biological diversity, according to UNESCO, a scientific group. However, the mountains have been threatened by the coffee, tea, rubber and oil palm industries or have been logged, reported Earth Touch News Network. The range was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site, meaning it is a place to be protected, in 2012\. However, logging and hunting still threaten the area. Ahmed told The Post that the sacred grove where the E. gryffindori was discovered has no legal protection. The biodiversity the scientists found there, he said, was "staggering." It is home to "fantastic beasts" of many kinds. In his interview with Earth Touch, Ahmed joked about a different Rowling character, Aragog. It's an enormous, hairy, talking spider that lives in the Forbidden Forest at Hogwarts. The spider appears in the second book, "Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets." The creature's name translates to "leader of the spiders." Ahmed told Earth Touch the huge spider's name could be used in the future. "We might name another cool spider after Aragog!" he said.