Spider named for Rowling character Before they were scientists, Javed Ahmed and Rajashree Khalap were Harry Potter fans.  Before they found the hat-shaped spider, Ahmed and Khalap discovered Harry Potter. Ahmed first cracked open the books in his teens. For Khalap, it was as a grown-up. They looked forward to "Harry Potter and The Cursed Child" and were delighted to see that world grow in "Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them." The scientists saw ties between J.K. Rowling's make-believe world and the critters yet to be discovered in their own world. That feeling sent them into a part of Karnataka, a state in India. A place for animals and plants had been preserved for years by the people in Karnataka. Many different animals, insects and plants live there. The scientists were part of a three-person team that found their own "fantastic beasts" there. One was a spider that looked like a lady bug. Another was a tiny spider that made them think of Harry Potter. It was brown and shaped like a triangle. Ahmed and Khalap agreed it looked like Rowling's Sorting Hat. The hat is from the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. Harry Potter and his friends spend most of their time there. The hat is placed on the head of each new student. It shouts out the child's house after thinking for a while. The houses are named after the people who started the school.  One was named Godric Gryffindor. He was the first owner of the Sorting Hat. After the scientists trapped and examined the hat-like spider, Ahmed told The Washington Post it became clear they had discovered a new type. That meant the three would get to name it. The tiny brown spider became Eriovixia gryffindori. The three scientists wrote about their study and the spider. They also wrote about Rowling and how they gave the spider its name.  Ahmed thought the Harry Potter name "would be a wonderful way to draw attention" to spiders. He said they often get no attention. Khalap liked the name.   So did Rowling. She wrote "Congratulations" to them on the computer for their discovery.  Ahmed said when he first read the books, he had no idea any of this would happen. He did not know he would end up naming a spider in such a fun way and be congratulated by Rowling. "It was quite a moment," he said. The E. gryffindori spider is tiny. Its triangle shape lets the spider hide in the plants in India's mountains. The mountains are home to many of the country's different kinds of animals. It is an important place to protect, one group said. However, companies take coffee, tea, logs and other things from the mountains, reported Earth Touch News Network. Ahmed said the law does not protect the place where the E. gryffindori was discovered. The different kinds of life the scientists found there, he said, was "staggering." It is home to animals and plants of many kinds. In talking to Earth Touch, Ahmed joked about a different Rowling creature, Aragog. It is a huge, hairy, talking spider. It lives in the Forbidden Forest at Hogwarts. The spider is in the second book, "Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets." The creature's name means "leader of the spiders." Ahmed told Earth Touch the huge spider's name could be used in the future. "We might name another cool spider after Aragog!" he said.