Reviled birds reduce rat population JOHANNESBURG, South Africa — Allyn Bagu lay in bed in her new apartment. She was listening to the animals that lived under the roof as they moved around and screeched. One day, her sister-in-law saw one of the animals outside their third-floor window. She screamed. It was an owl. “I was thinking of moving,” Bagu said. “It’s bad luck.” In South Africa, many people think that owls are bad luck. Some people think that when an owl lands on a roof and hoots, someone is going to die. Bagu’s husband called EcoSolutions. It is a company that moves owls. It turned out there were 10 owls in Bagu’s dark, warm attic. Owl catcher Hussein Mduduzi caught two baby owls, called owlets. The eight grown owls flew off. Mduduzi came down with the owlets in a box. The babies looked nervous. Their heart-shaped faces swiveled about, gazing with large, dark eyes at the creature who had taken them from their home. Bagu’s tiny daughter burst into tears. Tendai Remwa also works for EcoSolutions. She tried to calm down Bagu and her daughter. “These owls are just like any other birds,” she said. “It’s very bad to take the babies away from their mothers.” She explained that the grown-up owls would return unless the holes to the roof were closed. The owls needed a new home to go to. Nesting boxes would need to be placed nearby. Bagu looked unsure, but anything was better than having them in the attic. Remwa is an owl lover. She hopes to change ideas people have about owls that are not true. She is educating people about owls through the Township Owls Project. The project teaches schoolchildren how to feed and care for the owls. The hope is that they will grow to understand owls and even become their protectors. When Lerato Ramathopa was 13, she told her family that she would be caring for barn owls at school. “They said to me I was going to die soon, and I was going to bring bad luck on the family,” she said. The weeks that followed changed her life. She learned how to feed the owlets and clean their box. She would hold the owlets and touch their down. She would watch as their necks twisted almost the entire way around. "I started developing a love for owls," Ramathopa said. Owl catcher Mduduzi grew up in a village. He remembers huddling in bed in a hut at night, hearing the hoots of owls. It meant there was something dangerous outside. He nestled down in fear. Mduduzi began rescuing owls five years ago. He was nervous, he said, "because I didn’t trust owls.” Now, after years of saving owlets, he has learned to love them. Mduduzi teaches people that owls are like any other birds. The difference is that they catch the large rats that have become a huge problem in the area. The rats crawl into people’s homes and eat their food, clothing and shoes. He said that after he tells people about owls and what they do, most people agree to accept the owls living in the neighborhood. “Now they know that owls are not dangerous to people," Mduduzi said.