Reviled birds reduce rat population JOHANNESBURG, South Africa — Allyn Bagu lay in bed. She was listening to the creatures nesting under the roof of her new apartment in the city of Johannesburg in South Africa. She could hear them scrabbling around and their haunting screeches. One day, her sister-in-law saw one of them outside their third-floor window and screamed. It was an owl. “I was thinking of moving,” Bagu said, shuddering. “It’s bad luck.” In many parts of Africa owls are thought to be foretellers of death. Some people think that witch doctors send owls to people's houses. They think that when the owl lands on the roof and hoots, someone is going to die. Bagu’s husband called EcoSolutions. It is a company that moves owls. It turned out there were 10 owls in Bagu’s dark, warm attic. Owl catcher Hussein Mduduzi jumped around on the roof. He managed to catch two owlets, but the eight grown owls flew off. Mduduzi descended, carrying the owlets in a box. The babies looked nervous. Their heart-shaped faces swiveled about, gazing with large, dark eyes at the creature who’d taken them from their home. Bagu’s tiny daughter burst into tears, ran and snuggled up to her mother. Tendai Remwa, who also works for EcoSolutions, tried to calm down Bagu and her daughter. “These owls are just like any other birds,” she said. “It’s very bad to take the babies away from their mothers.” She explained that the grown-up owls would return unless the entrance holes were closed and owl nesting boxes were placed nearby. Bagu looked unsure, but anything was better than having them in the attic. Remwa is an owl lover. She hopes to erase ideas about owls that are not true. She is educating people about the value of owls through the Township Owls Project. The project teaches schoolchildren how to feed and care for the owls. The hope is that they will grow to understand owls and even become their protectors. Since the project began in 1998, thousands of children have been involved. When Lerato Ramathopa was 13, she announced to her family that she would be caring for barn owls at school. “They said to me I was going to die soon and I was going to bring bad luck on the family,” she said. The weeks that followed changed her life. She learned how to feed the owlets and clean their box. She would hold the owlets, touching their down, and watching as their necks twisted almost the entire way around. "I started developing a love for owls," Ramathopa said. Owl catcher Mduduzi grew up in a village. He remembers huddling in bed in a hut at night, hearing the hoots of owls. It meant there was something evil and dangerous lurking outside. He nestled down in fear. Mduduzi began rescuing owls five years ago. He was nervous, he said, "because I didn’t trust owls.” It was a job that others were afraid to take. Now after years of climbing up to roofs and reaching into small dark spaces to save owlets, he has learned to love them. Mduduzi teaches people that owls are like any other birds, except that they get rid of an everyday evil. The owls eat the large rats in South Africa that crawl into people’s shacks and eat their food, clothing and shoes. After he tells people about owls and their behavior, he said, most people agree to accept the owls living in the neighborhood. “People in townships have got a problem with owls, and they use rat poison. We go there and explain how the owls work, how the owls eat rats,” he said. “So now they know that owls are not dangerous to people.”