Scientists weave report on spiders' aerial techniques Spiders are falling from the sky all the time. Most airborne spiders are small and scattered, so people usually do not notice, except when they come down all at once.  A rain of spiders covered the Australian town of Goulburn in silk in 2015.  A Goulburn resident who bravely looked up saw a long tunnel of spiders in the air, he said. The spiders dropped in on long strands of silk webbing. Scientists call the behavior "ballooning." Records of spider ballooning go back for many years. However, scientists have struggled to understand how the spiders generate lift. Ideas have been shared about how they take to the sky. A new study in the journal PLOS Biology focuses on silk. It's the most detailed look so far at the skinny spider fibers that catch the wind. Hervé Elettro studies spider silk at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich, Switzerland. He said the study cuts through the many ideas about spider ballooning. The tiny silk fibers have "the right drag" for the spider to be lifted without much effort, he said.  High Flyers - This ballooning is all about spiders spreading out to other locations. Floating spiders boarded scientist Charles Darwin's HMS Beagle ship. That was back in 1832. Darwin wrote in his journal that the spiders "must have come at least 60 miles." Years later, a scientist with the U.S. government captured a spider, using an insect trap attached to an aircraft. It was nearly 3 miles in the air. That's much higher than most winged insects can fly, said Moonsung Cho of the Technical University of Berlin in Germany. He is a writer of the new report. Cho first saw wild ballooning spiders at Berlin's Lilienthal Park. He thought maybe human designs could copy the spiders' skill. Cho and his co-workers caught a dozen crab spiders from the park. Crab spiders are relatively large for ballooning spiders. Most other spiders that balloon are smaller or younger. The scientists built an outdoor platform and placed the spiders on top. Before a spider ballooned, it searched for the highest point on the platform, Cho said. Once the spider was there, something unusual happened. The spider reached up with one leg. Cho thought it was similar to a golfer checking for the direction of the wind. Ballooning Follows Leg Lifts Cho said that he couldn't know whether the leg lift was intended. However, these leg lifts often happened right before the spiders ballooned. "You always want to be careful about interpreting behavior," said scientist Steve Yanoviak of the University of Louisville in Kentucky. He has studied gliding spiders. However, he said, the study writers "make a good case the spiders are probably sensing air currents." After the leg lift, the spiders stood in what Cho called the "tiptoe" pose. High on their legs, the spiders stuck their rears upward and sprayed out silk. Then they zipped into the sky. The spiders were gone with the wind in seconds. It is believable that spiders can sense wind speed and direction using hairs on their legs, said Monica Mowery. She is a doctoral student at the University of Toronto in Canada. She studies ballooning by black widow spiders. Awaiting Calmer Breezes - The crab spiders did not balloon at high wind speeds, the writers said. If the wind became stronger than a gentle breeze, they waited for it to calm down. It wasn't easy to study the ballooning silk, Cho said. The thin fibers are difficult to see. So, Cho put crab spiders in a wind tunnel. He placed a reel behind them and, when the spiders sprayed their silk, he rolled it up. The average silk strand was 9 feet long. However, it was thinner than a human hair. With such thin strands, "the air is very sticky, like honey," Cho said. The action between sticky air and skinny threads, the writers say, pulls spiders into the air.