Spiders have big appetites You might not know it, but spiders are everywhere. Scientists recently studied some North Carolina homes. They found spiders in every single house. There were spiders in almost 7 out of 10 bathrooms. More than three-quarters of bedrooms had spiders too.  There are many spiders in the world. One study estimated that there are about 131 spiders per square meter of the Earth. A square meter is slightly larger than a square yard. It is also known that spiders have very big appetites for food. Two European scientists, Martin Nyffeler and Klaus Birkhofer studied how much spiders eat. What they found is shocking.  The world's spiders eat somewhere between 400 million and 800 million tons of creatures in a year. That means that spiders eat at least as much meat as all 7 billion humans on the planet combined. The writers say that people eat 400 million tons of meat and fish each year. Nyffeler and Birkhofer published their study in the journal the Science of Nature earlier this month. Most spiders just eat insects. Some of the larger types of spiders eat bigger creatures, though. Some snack on lizards. They might even eat birds and small mammals, or warm-blooded animals.  There are even more strange facts in this story, though. The amount of food spiders eat every year is greater than the total weight of all humans.  The total biomass of all adult humans on Earth is estimated to be 287 million tons. Mass is the amount of matter there is in an object. Everything in the world is made up of matter. Biomass means living matter. You would have to add in the weight of kids to get the biomass total of all humans. Kids make up about 70 million tons. Even including kids and adults, the total mass would still be less than the total amount of food eaten by spiders in a year. In other words, spiders could eat all of us and still be hungry. Nyffeler and Birkhofer wanted to know two things. The first was how many spiders live in a square meter of land in each of the different types of land on Earth. The second was the average amount of food eaten by spiders of different sizes in a year. They found some interesting facts. Some places, like hot sandy deserts and cold mossy tundra, have fewer spiders. Spiders cannot survive in those places very well. On the other hand, some places on earth hold 1,000 or more spiders per square meter. The writers say these places have "favorable" conditions for spiders to live in. Nyffeler and Birkhofer don't say exactly what they mean by "favorable," though. The scientists shared another fact. If you gathered up all the spiders on the planet and put them on top of a very large scale, together they'd weigh about 25 million tons. To help you think about how big that is, the Titanic weighed about 52,000 tons. The famous ship sank in 1912. The combined mass of all the spiders on Earth equals the mass of 478 Titanics. The spider scientists also found that spiders eat about one-tenth of their body weight in food per day. That's like a 200-pound man eating 20 pounds of meat each day. On the other hand, it would take about 2,000 pounds of spiders to eat a 200-pound man in one day. In the end, spiders' big appetites help people. Spiders primarily feast on bugs. That means fewer pests in our gardens. We have fewer mosquitoes in the yard and fewer flies in the house because of spiders.