Scientists weave report on spiders' aerial techniques We don't always see it, but spiders fall from the sky all the time. Most of the spiders are small. They tend to fall one at a time. Usually people do not notice. Spiders make strings of silk. Then they use them to move around. People do notice in some cases. This happens when many spiders come from the sky at once. Spiders and silk rained down on the town of Goulburn, Australia, in 2015. The ground looked as if it was covered in snow, but it was not snow. It was spider silk.  One person there looked up. He saw a long tunnel of spiders in the air, he said. The spiders dropped down on long strings of silk webs. Scientists call this "ballooning." Scientists have known about spider ballooning for many years. They have had trouble understanding how the spiders get up in the air. Ideas have been shared about it. A new study looked at the spiders' silk. The silk strings catch the wind. This ballooning is all about spreading out.  From 60 Miles Away Charles Darwin was a scientist. In 1832, he noticed spiders got onto his ship. Darwin wrote that the spiders "must have come at least 60 miles." Years later, a scientist caught a spider outside an airplane. It was almost 3 miles in the air. Moonsung Cho was one of the writers of the new study. He said 3 miles is much higher than most insects can fly.  Cho first saw wild ballooning spiders at a park in Germany. As an engineer, he always thinks about how to design new things. He thought maybe people could learn from the spiders. He and other scientists caught spiders from the park. They built a platform and put the spiders on top. Spiders would search for the highest place on the platform, Cho said. They were getting ready to balloon, or take off. Then something unusual happened. The spiders reached up with one leg. They seemed to be checking which direction the wind was blowing. Were Spiders Checking The Wind? - Cho said he was not sure that the spiders were checking the wind. These leg lifts often happened before the spiders ballooned, though. After the leg lift, the spiders stood up high on their legs. They stuck their rears upward and sprayed out strands of silk. Then they took off into the sky. Spiders were quickly gone with the wind. The spiders did not balloon at high wind speeds, the writers said. They waited for a gentle wind. The silk is thinner than a person's hair. It sticks to the wind and pulls spiders upwards into the air, the study said.