Scientists weave report on spiders' aerial techniques People might not see it, but spiders fall from the sky all the time. Most airborne spiders are small and scattered, so they often go unnoticed, except when they descend all at once. A rain of spiders drowned the Australian town of Goulburn in silk in 2015.  A Goulburn resident who bravely looked up saw a several-hundred-yard tunnel of spiderlings in the air, he said. The spiders parachuted in on long strands of webbing, a behavior that biologists call "ballooning." Records of spider ballooning go back centuries. However, scientists have struggled to understand how the arachnids generate lift. One scientist proposed that they use forces related to static electricity to take to the sky. A new study in the journal PLOS Biology focuses on silk, not static. It's the most detailed examination yet of the skinny spider fibers that lasso the wind. Hervé Elettro studies silk and other materials at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich, Switzerland. He said the research cuts through the many theories about spider ballooning. The tiny silk fibers, he said, "experience the right drag for the spider to be lifted with relatively little effort." New Volcanic Islands Attract Spiders This ballooning is all about species dispersal. Spiders spread out and are some of the first animals to show up on new volcanic islands. When floating spiders boarded the HMS Beagle ship in 1832, naturalist Charles Darwin wrote in his journal, "I caught some of the Aeronaut spiders which must have come at least 60 miles." Decades later, a scientist with the U.S. Department of Agriculture captured a spider, using an insect trap affixed to an aircraft. It was nearly 3 miles above sea level. That's much higher than most winged insects can fly, said Moonsung Cho, a researcher at the Technical University of Berlin in Germany and an author of the new report. Cho first saw wild ballooning spiders on a walk through Berlin's Lilienthal Park, a memorial to Otto Lilienthal, a German aviation pioneer who died in a gliding accident in 1896. Cho, an electrical engineer by training, was inspired. Maybe human designs could copy the spiders' skill, he thought. He and his co-workers caught a dozen crab spiders from the park. Crab spiders are relatively large for ballooning spiders at a few dozen milligrams, one weighs about as much as a grain of rice. Most other spiders that balloon are smaller or younger. The scientists constructed an outdoor platform, similar to a launchpad, and placed the spiders on top. Foreleg Lift Precedes Liftoff - Before a spider ballooned, it searched for the highest point on the domed platform, Cho said. Once the spider was there, something unusual happened. The spider reached up with a foreleg. It could compare to an athlete like a golfer checking for the direction of the wind. Cho was careful to say that he couldn't know whether the foreleg twitch was intended. However, there was a high frequency of these leg lifts right before the spiders ballooned. "You always want to be careful about interpreting behavior," said biologist Steve Yanoviak of the University of Louisville in Kentucky. He has studied gliding spiders. However, he said, the authors "make a good case the spiders are probably sensing air currents." After the foreleg lift, the spiders posed in what Cho called the "tiptoe" stance. High on their legs, the spiders stuck their rears upward, sprayed out silk and zipped into the sky. Like a kite torn from a child's grip, a spider was gone with the wind in seconds. It is believable that spiders can sense wind speed and direction using hairs on their raised legs, said Monica Mowery. She is a doctoral student at the University of Toronto in Canada who has studied ballooning by black widow spiders. The crab spiders did not balloon at high wind speeds, the authors observed. If the wind blew faster than 3 meters per second (about 6.7 miles per hour), or anything more than a gentle breeze, they waited for calmer conditions. Reeling In The Silk - It wasn't easy to study the ballooning silk, Cho said. Unless light catches the strands in just the right way, the fibers are invisible. So Cho captured a few more crab spiders and put them in a wind tunnel. He placed a reel behind them and, when the spiders sprayed their silk, he rolled it up like fishing line. The average silk strand was 9 feet long but just 200 nanometers in diameter. That's much thinner than a human hair. At such unimaginable small scales, "the air is very sticky, like honey," Cho said. The interaction between sticky air and skinny threads, the authors conclude, pulls spiders into the air. "They've put a very fine point on how silk interacts with air currents," Yanoviak noted. Cho is working on a computer simulation to mimic these flights. After that, he'd like to create tiny structures that can float in the atmosphere like a spider. Just don't ask him how those structures will fall where he wants them to nobody knows how, or whether, ballooning spiders steer themselves down.