All along the West Coast, a virus has attacked millions of starfish and they are dying. Climate change that has warmed the ocean waters is causing the disease to spread. WASHINGTON — Millions of starfish are dying all along the West Coast. Washington state Democrats say it’s time for Congress to get involved and find out why. The outbreak was first noticed in the state by rangers in Olympic National Park in June 2013. It has hit 20 species of starfish, also known as sea stars. The sea stars get wounds on their bodies. After that, they begin curling up and soon lose their legs, shriveling up and breaking down into mush. Researchers fear the problem may be the result of a virus caused by climate change, and the heating up of the Earth's climate. The disease is developing the fastest in warmer ocean waters blamed on global warming. “There has never been an outbreak of disease in natural populations of animals that I know that’s been this large,” said Drew Harvell, a professor at Cornell University. Harvell has been studying the starfish deaths on the San Juan Islands, in northwestern Washington state. Congressman Denny Heck wants the government to declare “sea star wasting syndrome” an emergency before the starfish all die out. Five other Washington state Democrats from the House of Representatives in Congress have joined Heck's efforts. “The truth of the matter is we have absolutely no system in place to respond. None,” Heck said in a speech on the House floor. Heck’s bill — a proposed law — is called the Marine Disease Emergency Act. It would require U.S. government agencies to create a rapid response plan and free up research money for scientists. It is uncertain how much it might end up costing. For starters, Heck wants Congress to set aside $12 million to coordinate research among government agencies. His bill also would create a fund to accept public donations for the effort. Democratic Representative Derek Kilmer said he wanted to back the plan because starfish were “turning into goo.” Making sure they live is necessary for the health of the region’s waters, he said. “You take them out of the sound or out of the Pacific Ocean and it hurts animals like fish and whales that are higher up on the food chain,” Kilmer said in an interview. He called starfish a "keystone" species. Harvell said dead starfish had been discovered all along the West Coast, from Alaska to Mexico. She said the problem had not been studied as extensively on the East Coast. However, sea star deaths have been reported in many states, including Maine, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Louisiana and Florida, she said. “It’s pretty horrific,” Harvell said. “They develop large lesions in the body wall and their organs start to fall out of those and their arms walk away.” Heck introduced a similar bill last year that did not get enough votes. Supporters of this year’s legislation acknowledge that it will be a tough sell in Congress, where fighting among lawmakers has meant that little is getting done beyond dealing with basic problems. “The biggest hurdle is not the bill. The biggest hurdle is that Congress is not exactly" passing a lot of laws right now, "to say the least,” Kilmer said. “But I think there’s an understanding that this is an important issue.” Heck held up a rubber starfish when he promoted the bill on the House floor last month. He says that backers of the legislation had one big weapon on their side. “We’re helped greatly by the kind of tragic visuals that come out of melting starfish,” he said. He also hopes that the public’s familiarity with starfish will boost the cause, too: “If you live anywhere near a coast, you’ve walked on that sand and picked one up.” Twelve members of Congress support the bill, including those from California, Florida, New Jersey and Oregon. Heck said it was proof that the deaths were a national problem. He said his bill would create a national place to hold information to quickly share any research linked to starfish deaths in all states. It also would set up a national volunteer working group to advise the federal government on marine disease emergencies. “The origin of my passion dates to being a kid on the Washington coast and picking them up, seashells and sea stars,” Heck said. “If you grow up here and your parents go camping on the coast, it’s one of those wondrous things … It tugs at my heart.”