Millions of sea stars, also known as starfish, have died in the last year. Scientists now have figured out which virus is responsible for the deaths in tidal pools from Alaska to Mexico. Millions of sea stars, also known as starfish, have died in the last year along California and the Pacific Coast. The deaths have been part of one of the largest wildlife die-offs ever seen in the world’s oceans. Now, scientists have made a major breakthrough in this mystery, finding the cause of the disease that has devastated starfish populations. A team of more than a dozen researchers reported that a previously unidentified virus is causing the epidemic among starfish. Researchers from Cornell University, the University of California, Santa Cruz, and the Monterey Bay Aquarium announced their findings Monday. The same virus that is killing starfish today was also found in museum starfish specimens going back to 1942, indicating that the disease has been present in the Pacific Ocean for 72 years. The disease has popped up in the past, leading to smaller outbreaks, but no one knows what caused the current outbreak, which has killed up to 95 percent of starfish in some areas and spread from Alaska to Mexico. “Something may have happened recently that caused it to go rogue, because we’ve never seen anything like the current outbreak,” said Peter Raimondi, a professor of biology at UC Santa Cruz and co-author of the study. The disease that is killing starfish is known as “wasting syndrome.” It has infected at least 20 different species of starfish since it was first detected in Washington state in June 2013. It spread south to Oregon, Monterey Bay, Big Sur and all the way down to Baja California, in Mexico. Wasting syndrome has even killed starfish in major aquariums in Seattle, Monterey and other cities. Infected starfish first become sluggish and slow, then develop white lesions, or sores. Within days, they curl up and parts of their arms break off, actually crawling away. Soon after, the entire starfish turns into a gooey mess and dies. The scientists published their findings Monday in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, a scientific journal. They reported that the disease is a type of densovirus, similar to viruses that affect insects, sea urchins and other invertebrates — animals without a backbone. In the mystery of the dying starfish, scientists now know the killer’s name, but the case is not yet closed. “It’s definitely a huge breakthrough,” said Dr. Mike Murray, director of veterinary services at the Monterey Bay Aquarium. “It provides a lot of other researchers a place to start and say, ‘OK, we found this virus in lots of sea stars. What was the trigger? What started it all off? Are there other problems in other species?’” The virus is present in sea urchins and sand dollars, researchers found, but it isn’t killing them in large numbers. The virus spreads in seawater and sand, the scientists discovered. But it does not affect humans and there is no way to offer a cure to starfish populations. “It would be nice if we could do that, but it’s too simplistic,” Murray said, comparing it to human epidemics like the Spanish flu of 100 years ago or the Black Death in 14th-century Europe. “This is one of those natural phenomena that may or may not have a human basis behind it,” he said. “It is going to play itself out, and hopefully it will do that in a way that will allow sea stars to persist. But there are no guarantees.” Scientists at Cornell were able to pinpoint the disease using cutting-edge genetic tools. “There are 10 million viruses in a drop of seawater, so discovering the virus associated with a marine disease can be like looking for a needle in a haystack,” said Cornell University microbiologist Ian Hewson, lead author of the study. Working with 335 starfish collected on the West Coast, the Cornell researchers exposed healthy starfish to tissue from infected ones, learning how the disease spread. Now that scientists believe they know the cause of the deaths, they want to find out why the disease spread so widely. The cause could be natural, like overpopulation of starfish in some areas. It could be related to humans, though — pollution, warming waters, or increasing acidity in the oceans. If the disease was triggered by human behavior, new laws could make a difference, experts say. “It is probably part of their population cycle. But if it is driven by something linked to pollution or climate change or things like that, then we would have some responsibility to deal with it,” said Brian Tissot, director of the Humboldt State Marine Laboratory. Sea stars are important predators in tide pools and waters near the shore. They eat mussels, clams and snails. Without starfish, mussels and other species could explode out of control, affecting other ocean life. There is some hope, however. Sea stars in Big Sur and other areas appear to have had lot of offspring over the past year, scientists say. All those baby starfish may be a way the species is fighting back against the die-off. Still, big questions remain. “How likely is this disease to maintain itself and keep populations suppressed?” Raimondi asked. “How likely is it to jump to other species? Those are really important questions. And the jury is still out.”