There is a disease making millions of starfish sick. Many of them lose their legs, get mushy and die. Scientists say we need to find out fast why it is happening so they can save the starfish. WASHINGTON — Millions of starfish are dying all along the West Coast. Some congressmen from Washington state are trying to do something about it. They want to find out the cause of the deaths. They say it is time for Congress to get involved. Rangers at Olympic National Park first noticed the problem in 2013. The disease has affected 20 different types of starfish, which are also known as sea stars. The sea stars get wounds on their bodies and begin curling up. Then they lose their legs and eventually the sea stars turn into mush. Scientists fear a virus has led to the deaths. Viruses are germs that can lead to illnesses. In this case, scientists think the virus is caused by climate change. Climate change is a condition that leads to unusual weather. This includes the Earth getting warmer over time. The starfish disease is spreading the fastest in warmer ocean waters. Drew Harvell is a professor at Cornell University who has been studying the starfish deaths. She said there has never before been a natural disease outbreak among a group of animals this large. Congressman Denny Heck wants the government to call the problem an emergency. He wants it to happen before the starfish all die out. “The truth of the matter is we have absolutely no system in place to respond. None,” Heck said. The law Heck wants to pass would force U.S. government agencies to make a plan to act quickly to stop the starfish from dying. The government would also have to give money to scientists to study the deaths. It is uncertain what it might end up costing. For starters, Heck wants Congress to set aside $12 million. That money would be used to get government agencies to share information and studies. His law also would set up a way for people to give money to help the starfish. Congressman Derek Kilmer is working with Heck. Kilmer said he wanted to help because starfish were “turning into goo.” He said making sure the starfish live is necessary for a healthy ocean. The starfish are needed so that bigger fish survive. Harvell said dead starfish had been found all along the West Coast. They have been found from Alaska to Mexico. She said the problem had not been studied as much on the East Coast. However, sea star deaths had been reported in many states there. Maine, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Louisiana and Florida are some of them. “It’s pretty horrific,” she said. “Their organs start to fall out" of cuts on the body, she said. Then "their arms walk away.” Heck tried to get the law passed last year. Experts say it will be tough to get Congress to vote for it. Heck held up a rubber starfish when he pushed for the law in Congress last month. He says that supporters of the law had one big weapon on their side. The "melting starfish" look very sad, which could attract support. Heck also hopes that because people know starfish, it will help the cause: “If you live anywhere near a coast, you’ve walked on that sand and picked one up.” Twelve members of Congress support the bill, including those from California, Florida, New Jersey and Oregon. Heck said it was proof that the deaths were a national problem. He said his law would create a place to store information and share it quickly. If the law is passed, it would also set up a national volunteer group to advise the government on other disease emergencies in the ocean. “The origin of my passion dates to being a kid on the Washington coast and picking them up, seashells and sea stars,” Heck said. “If you grow up here and your parents go camping on the coast, it’s one of those wondrous things … It tugs at my heart.”