Sea stars, or starfish, have died off from Alaska to Mexico. Scientists using modern instruments have found the culprit. A virus causes "wasting syndrome." Are starfish fighting back? For the last year, more than a dozen scientists have been trying to solve a mystery: what is killing millions of sea stars, also known as starfish, from Alaska to Mexico? A disease has been wiping out starfish. Scientists are calling it an epidemic — a disease spreading out of control. So many sea stars have died that scientists say it is one of the largest wildlife die-offs ever seen in the world’s oceans. Starfish first started dying off in Washington state in 2013, and then the disease spread south to Oregon, California and Mexico. Sea stars even began dying in major aquariums in Seattle, Washington and Monterey, California. This week, a team of scientists announced that it has figured out what is killing the starfish: a virus. The virus was unknown, but the researchers found out that it has been around for decades. Starfish in museums going back to 1942 have it, meaning the virus has been in the Pacific Ocean for 72 years. In the past, the virus caused outbreaks that killed smaller numbers of starfish. No one knows what caused the virus to explode in the past year, killing up to 95 percent of the sea stars in some areas. “We’ve never seen anything like the current outbreak,” said Peter Raimondi, a professor at UC Santa Cruz. “Something may have happened recently.” The disease that is killing the sea stars is known as “wasting syndrome.” It affects at least 20 different species of starfish. A sea star infected with wasting syndrome starts to move more slowly. It develops white sores. Then its arms begin to break off and crawl away. Finally, the starfish turns into a gooey mess and dies. Wasting syndrome is caused by the virus that scientists found. It’s a type of densovirus, similar to viruses that affect insects, sea urchins, and other invertebrates, or animals without a spine. Scientists now know what is killing the starfish, but the mystery is far from solved. “What started it all off?" asked Dr. Mike Murray of the Monterey Bay Aquarium. "Are there other problems in other species?’” Many questions still need answering, but the discovery is “a huge breakthrough,” Murray said. The researchers found that the virus spreads in seawater and sand. It does not affect humans, and there is no way to offer a cure for starfish. “It would be nice if we could do that,” Murray said. He compared the starfish disease outbreak to human epidemics that could not be controlled like the Black Death in Europe in the 1300s. Starfish dying off is a natural event that may or may not be caused by humans, Murray said. It will continue on its own path, and hopefully starfish will survive, he said. Scientists at Cornell were able to pinpoint the virus using advanced genetic tools. “There are 10 million viruses in a drop of seawater," said Cornell scientist Ian Hewson, co-author of the study. Discovering a virus "can be like looking for a needle in a haystack.” The Cornell researchers worked with 335 sea stars collected on the West Coast. They exposed healthy starfish to infected ones to learn how the disease spreads. Scientists know what causes the disease, but they still aren’t sure what allowed it to spread so quickly. Too many starfish, too close together, could be a cause. Other explanations blame humans: pollution, warming waters due to climate change or more acidity in the oceans. Sea stars play an important role in tide pools and shallow waters near the shore. They eat mussels, clams and snails. Without starfish, the numbers of those other shellfish could get out of control. Scientists point to one cause for hope: sea stars in some areas had more babies than usual in the past year. All those baby starfish may be the species fighting back against the disease. Still, big questions remain, Raimondi said. How long will the disease continue to kill starfish and will it affect other species? More research is needed, he said.