Scientists explore dinosaur tongues The dinosaurs of "Jurassic World" might chase you and attack you. There is one thing a Tyrannosaurus rex can't do, though. It can't stick out its tongue. In the movies, dinosaurs often have open mouths with tongues that move around. Scientists found out that this is probably not correct though. Dinosaur tongues were stuck to the floors of their mouths. They were unable to wiggle around. Julia Clarke is a paleontologist. A paleontologist studies fossils to learn about the distant past. Clarke worked with scientists from the Chinese Academy of Sciences. They wrote a new paper together. The paper explained how they studied dinosaurs' tongues. The scientists looked at fossils. Fossils are the bones of animals from a long time ago. The fossils came from pterosaurs. They were flying reptiles. They no longer exist. Studying Alligator And Bird Tongues - They also looked at the tongues of today's alligators and birds. The scientists used X-ray scans to see inside the animals' mouths. They even opened the mouths to look at real tongues. Dinosaurs and birds are similar families of animals. Many scientists today believe birds came from dinosaurs. This is why the scientists studied bird tongues. The bird tongues could teach them about dinosaur tongues. Evolution is an idea, or theory, about the way things have changed over many years. Some dinosaurs evolved closer to birds. The scientists found that those dinosaurs had tongues more like birds. Most dinosaurs had different tongues, though. Their tongues were like today's alligator tongues. An alligator's tongue is fixed to the floor of its mouth. This says something about dinosaurs, the scientists said. The dinosaurs could not have moved their tongues or stuck them out. No Ice Cream Cones For T. Rex - The team says it is not clear why some dinosaurs and birds evolved different tongues. They think it comes down to feeding habits, though. Crocodiles and alligators are like many meat-eating dinosaurs. They do little chewing. Instead, they pull food apart with their teeth and swallow it down. Dinosaurs that ate plants, like Triceratops, needed to chew. That meant they needed tongues that move more. Birds have many different feeding habits. They often need tongues that move as well. Stephen Brusatte is a paleontologist in Scotland. He did not work on the study. He welcomed the new findings, though. Brusatte said there is a cousin of the T. rex called Yutyrannus. It has a mouth like an alligator. It makes sense that T. rex did as well, Brusatte said. "Jurassic Park" does not show the T. rex correctly, Brusatte said. A T. rex probably couldn't stick its tongue out.