T. rex had the toughest teeth A Tyrannosaurus rex could bite through bones like no other animal. A new study explored why the T. rex is known as one of the fiercest and most powerful dinosaurs.  The study shows that T. rex could not only crack large bones, but it could crush and eat them, too. The T. rex could get nutritional value from its prey's bones that smaller, weaker animals could not.  Paul Gignac is an assistant professor at Oklahoma State University and the lead writer of the study. He says the T. rex is unique because of its bite force and strong teeth. These factors allowed the T. rex to bite down extremely hard on its prey. Gignac says that a T. rex could easily slice right through bones.  Gregory Erickson from Florida State University worked with Gignac to learn more about a T. rex's bite force. The researchers compared the bite force with that of other predators that are still around today.  Wolves and hyenas are two of the predators the researchers looked at. They are both able to crush bones with their teeth. Their secret? They have what are known as "occluding teeth," in which the top and bottom rows of teeth fit together perfectly. Occluding teeth are a feature common in meat-eating mammals.  T. rex did not have occluding teeth. As a result, researchers were not sure how it managed to destroy bones the size of small tree trunks. "Without occlusion, it is typical for food items to rotate and shift as teeth are being engaged," said Gignac. This makes it difficult to get a firm grasp on prey.  How did the T. rex still manage to crush bones? The answer is the sheer power of its bite. The study found that T. rex's jaw had a crushing 8,000 pounds of bite force. That is equivalent to the weight of about three cars. Erickson and Gignac wanted to find out more about how T. rex crushed its prey. They came up with a new measurement called tooth pressure. Tooth pressure measures how much force can press against an animal's teeth. The dinosaur's tooth pressure was incredible: an astounding 431,000 pounds per square inch of tooth surface. But even that pressure may not have been enough to get the job done, the study found. Saltwater crocodiles are the world's largest living reptiles. They use nearly as much tooth pressure as the T. rex even though they are much smaller. However, crocodiles only use this power to capture their prey, not to chew it and break up the bones. Instead, crocodiles swallow their prey whole. The researchers found a difference between crocodile and T. rex teeth. According to Gignac, T. rex teeth were strong and sturdy enough to tear into any mammal. Its teeth were huge and shaped like cones. They were also replaced every few years when they became worn.  This means that the limit to T. rex's bite force was probably not the power of its bite, but the strength of its teeth. Because the T. rex bit down with so much force, its teeth had to endure a lot of stress.  Crocodiles and T. rex both put as much stress as possible on their teeth. They do not go past this limit. According to Gignac, even just a bit more stress would destroy the teeth.  In other words, the bite of a T. rex used just enough strength to crush bones.