Scientists explore dinosaur tongues The fearsome creatures of "Jurassic World" might chase you, kill you and rip you limb from limb, but there is one simple thing a Tyrannosaurus rex couldn't do. It couldn't stick out its tongue. Hollywood often depicts dinosaurs open-mouthed with tongues waving. However, researchers have discovered that many of them were probably tongue-tied, their tongues firmly anchored to the floors of their mouths and unable to waggle around. Julia Clarke is a paleontologist at the University of Texas at Austin. A paleontologist studies fossils to learn about the distant past. Clarke and scientists from the Chinese Academy of Sciences wrote an article in the scientific journal Plos One. The article described how they explored the tongue-wagging abilities of dinosaurs. The scientists looked at fossils of a set of bony structures known as the hyoid that anchors the tongue in the mouth. The scientists looked at fossils from flying reptiles known as pterosaurs, which no longer exist. They also looked at the tongues of alligators and modern birds, including the common pheasant, emu and redhead duck. To study the alligators and birds, the scientists used X-ray scans and even cut open real tongues. Birds have thin, mobile tongues and Y-shaped hyoids. Their hyoids are two long, bony projections pointing toward the back of the mouth. A central bony section sits in the front of the mouth with the tongue wrapped around it. Muscles attach to these bony projections, allowing birds to move their tongues and stick them out. Studying Bird Tongues For Clues - "We take birds for granted, but they have crazy tongues," Clarke said. A bird's tongue is able to stick out so far because the skinny hyoid bones are very long, according to Clarke. The bones are so long that "in a hummingbird they wrap over the surface of the skull into the nose holes," she said. Dinosaurs and birds are closely related. In fact, many scientists today believe dinosaurs are the ancestors of birds. This is why the scientists studied bird tongues to get clues about dinosaur tongues. Evolution is the process by which types of life have developed over many, many years. The team found that dinosaurs that evolved closer to birds, such as microraptors, had hyoids similar to, but shorter than, those of modern birds. Long complex hyoids were also found in pterosaurs. However, the majority of dinosaurs were found to have a simple, short hyoid like modern alligators. An alligator's large, fleshy tongue is fixed to the floor of its mouth. Their tongues have a broad, short piece of cartilage at the back rather than the longer bony support seen in birds. This, say the researchers, suggests dinosaurs could not have waggled their tongues, let alone stuck them out. Clarke notes one exception. A group of plant-eating dinosaurs known as ornithischians, which includes Triceratops, were found to have an unusual, complex hyoid. Meat-Eating Dinosaurs Didn't Chew Much The team says it is not clear why some dinosaurs and birds evolved more mobile tongues. They suggest it comes down to feeding habits, though. Crocodiles and alligators, like many meat-eating dinosaurs, do little chewing. Instead, they use a "tear and gulp" approach that does not require a mobile tongue. Dinosaurs that ate plants, like Triceratops, needed to chew, while birds have a variety of feeding habits based on their lifestyle. "Once you have things that are eating seeds like birds, that are eating smaller prey items, then there seems to be elaboration of the tongue," Clarke said. "Once there are wings instead of mobile forelimbs then I think there is more pressure on the tongue to participate in positioning food or food processing, moving food in the mouth." Stephen Brusatte is a paleontologist at the University of Edinburgh in Scotland. Brusatte was not involved in the study, but he welcomed the research. "It turns out that most dinosaurs have the very simple hyoid bones of modern crocodiles, which anchor a tongue that is pretty much glued to the floor of the mouth," he said. "A cousin of T. rex called Yutyrannus has this type of hyoid bone, as do almost all other dinosaurs." Because of this, it's reasonable to conclude that T. rex did as well, Brusatte said. "Jurassic Park" does not show the T. rex accurately, Brusatte said. A T. rex probably couldn't stick its tongue out at all.