T. rex had the toughest teeth The bone-crunching bite of the Tyrannosaurus rex was powerful like no other dinosaur's, according to a new study that solidifies the carnivore's reputation as the fiercest of dinosaurs. The findings, reported last week in the journal Scientific Reports, show that T. rex could not only crack the biggest of bones, it could also pulverize and ingest them. A T. rex could absorb marrow and minerals beyond the reach of less well-endowed competitors, researchers reported. "The combination of impressive bite force and stout teeth set T. rex apart," said lead author Paul Gignac, an assistant professor at Oklahoma State University. "It regularly scored, deeply punctured and even sliced through bones." Gignac and Gregory Erickson from Florida State University built on earlier attempts to measure T. rex's bite force. The researchers compared the bite force with predators roaming the wild today. Wolves and hyenas, for example, are also able to crush bones with their teeth, accessing nutritious marrow. Their secret? So-called occluding teeth that fit together perfectly, top and bottom, a feature common in carnivorous mammals. The T. rex lacked such dental gear, raising the question of how it managed to shatter bones the size of small tree trunks. "Without occlusion, it is typical for food items to rotate and shift as teeth are being engaged," making it difficult to get a firm grasp, said Gignac. To be sure, sheer power counts for something. The study found that T. rex's jaw exerted a crushing 3.6 metric tons (8,000 pounds) of bite force. The T. rex's jaw-crushing force was equivalent to the weight of three midsize cars. Even more impressive, the dinosaur's tooth pressure — a new metric devised by the researchers — was even greater: an astounding 30 metric tons per square centimeter (431,000 pounds per square inch) of dental surface. But even that pressure may not have been enough to get the job done, the study found. Saltwater crocodiles, the world's largest living reptiles, exert nearly as much pressure despite their much smaller size. They use that power, however, to capture their prey, swallowing them whole instead of chewing. The difference is that T. rex — even though lacking occluding teeth — still had the necessary equipment to make short work of bones. "It had extraordinarily large, conical and strongly rooted teeth that were replaced after being worn every couple of years," Gignac explained. "Sophisticated feeding systems more commonly associated with modern mammals also appeared during the age of dinosaurs," he added. Interestingly, the limit to T. rex's bite force was probably not muscular, but rather the capacity of its teeth. Biting down with so much force meant the T. rex's teeth were withstanding intense stress. Crocodiles and T. rex put pressure on their teeth that is "nearing the extreme structural limits of what reptilian tooth enamel can handle," Gignac said. T. rex's grip, in other words, was only what was needed to fracture bones. Any more might have caused irreparable damage to the king's pearly whites.