Scientists explore dinosaur tongues The fearsome creatures of "Jurassic World" might chase you and attack you. There is one thing a Tyrannosaurus rex can't do, though. It can't stick out its tongue. Hollywood movies often show dinosaurs open-mouthed with tongues waving. However, scientists have discovered that many of them were probably tongue-tied. Their tongues were anchored to the floors of their mouths and unable to move around. Julia Clarke is a paleontologist. A paleontologist studies fossils to learn about the distant past. Clarke and scientists from the Chinese Academy of Sciences wrote a new article. It described how they studied dinosaurs' tongues. The scientists looked at fossils, which are the bones of animals from long ago. They looked at a set of bones known as the hyoid that anchors the tongue in the mouth. The scientists looked at fossils from flying reptiles known as pterosaurs, which no longer exist. They also looked at the tongues of alligators and modern birds. To study the alligators and birds, the scientists used X-ray scans to see inside the body. They also opened the mouths to look at real tongues. Birds have thin, moveable tongues and Y-shaped hyoids. The top of the Y shape is made of two long bones pointing toward the back of the mouth. A central bony section connects them. It sits in the front of the mouth with the tongue wrapped around it. Muscles attach to the two pointy bones, allowing birds to move their tongues and stick them out. A Similarity Between Dinosaurs And Alligators - "We take birds for granted, but they have crazy tongues," Clarke said. A bird's tongue is able to stick out very far. That's because the skinny hyoid bones are very long, according to Clarke. Dinosaurs and birds are closely related. In fact, many scientists today believe dinosaurs are the ancestors of birds. This is why the scientists studied bird tongues. The bird tongues could give clues about dinosaur tongues. Evolution is an idea, or theory, about the way that types of life have developed over millions of years. The scientists found that dinosaurs that evolved closer to birds had hyoids similar to those of modern birds. This is because birds evolved from certain kinds of dinosaurs. Long hyoids were also found in pterosaurs. However, the majority of dinosaurs were found to have a different kind of hyoid. They were simple and short like modern alligators. An alligator's large, fleshy tongue is fixed to the floor of its mouth. Alligator tongues do not have the longer bony support seen in birds. This, say the scientists, suggests dinosaurs could not have moved their tongues or stuck them out. Clarke notes one type of dinosaur that breaks the rule. There is a group of plant-eating dinosaurs known as ornithischians, which includes Triceratops. The ornithischians were found to have an unusual and advanced hyoid. Tearing And Gulping Instead Of Chewing The team says it is not clear why some dinosaurs and birds evolved different tongues. They think it comes down to feeding habits, though. Crocodiles and alligators, like many meat-eating dinosaurs, do little chewing. Instead, they use a "tear and gulp" approach, which doesn't need the tongue to move a lot. Dinosaurs that ate plants, like Triceratops, needed to chew. That meant they needed tongues that move more. Birds have many different feeding habits based on their lifestyle. Stephen Brusatte is a paleontologist at the University of Edinburgh in Scotland. Brusatte was not involved in the study. He welcomed the new findings, though. "It turns out that most dinosaurs have the very simple hyoid bones of modern crocodiles, which anchor a tongue that is pretty much glued to the floor of the mouth," he said. "A cousin of T. rex called Yutyrannus has this type of hyoid bone, as do almost all other dinosaurs." Because of this, it's reasonable to conclude that T. rex did as well, Brusatte said. "Jurassic Park" does not show the T. rex correctly, Brusatte said. A T. rex probably couldn't stick its tongue out at all.