T. rex had the toughest teeth The bite of Tyrannosaurus rex was bone-crunching like no other, according to a new study. The study solidifies the fabled carnivore's reputation as the fiercest of all dinosaurs. The findings show that T. rex could not only crack enormous bones, it could also crush and swallow them. Researchers reported that the T. rex could get bone marrow from its prey's bones that smaller, weaker competitors could not. Bone marrow is a substance in bones that provides fat and protein, making it a nutritious snack for the T. rex.  "The combination of impressive bite force and stout teeth set T. rex apart," said lead author Paul Gignac. He is an assistant professor at Oklahoma State University. "It regularly scored, deeply punctured and even sliced through bones." Gignac, along with Gregory Erickson from Florida State University, built on earlier attempts to measure T. rex's bite force. The researchers compared the bite force with that of predators roaming the wild today. Wolves and hyenas are also able to crush bones with their teeth, accessing the bone marrow in their prey. Their secret? So-called occluding teeth that fit together perfectly, top and bottom. Occluding teeth are a feature common in meat-eating mammals.  T. rex did not have occluding teeth. Experts raised the question of how they managed to shatter bones the size of small tree trunks. "Without occlusion, it is typical for food items to rotate and shift as teeth are being engaged," said Gignac. This makes it difficult to get a firm grasp on prey. To be sure, sheer power counts for something. The study found that T. rex's jaw exerted a crushing 3.6 metric tons (8,000 pounds) of bite force. The T. rex's jaw crushed with the equivalent weight of three midsize cars. The researchers devised a new metric called tooth pressure. Tooth pressure measures how much stress the animal's teeth are under. The dinosaur's tooth pressure was incredible: an astounding 30 metric tons per square centimeter (431,000 pounds per square inch) of dental surface. However, even that massive amount of pressure may not have been enough to crush bones, the study found. Saltwater crocodiles, the world's largest living reptiles, exert nearly as much pressure despite their much smaller size. They use that power, however, only to capture their prey, swallowing them whole instead of chewing. The difference is that T. rex — even without occluding teeth — had teeth strong and sturdy enough to crush bones.  "It had extraordinarily large, conical and strongly rooted teeth that were replaced after being worn every couple of years," Gignac explained.  Interestingly, the limit to T. rex's bite force was probably not muscular, but the capacity of its teeth. Because the T. rex bit with so much force, its teeth withstood intense stress.  Crocodiles and T. rex put pressure on their teeth that is at the limit "of what reptilian tooth enamel can handle," Gignac said. T. rex's grip, in other words, may be the bare minimum of what is needed to fracture bones. Any more pressure might have caused permanent damage to the king's pearly whites.