Scientists explore dinosaur tongues The fearsome creatures of "Jurassic World" might chase you, kill you and rip you limb from limb, but there is one simple thing a Tyrannosaurus rex couldn't do: stick out its tongue. Hollywood depictions of dinosaurs often show the creatures open-mouthed with tongues waving. However, researchers have discovered that many of them were probably tongue-tied, their tongues firmly anchored to the floors of their mouths and unable to waggle around. Julia Clarke is a paleontologist at the University of Texas at Austin. A paleontologist studies fossils to learn about the distant past. Clarke and scientists from the Chinese Academy of Sciences wrote an article in the scientific journal Plos One, describing how they explored the tongue-wagging abilities of dinosaurs by looking at fossils of a set of bony structures known as the hyoid that anchors the tongue in the mouth. They also looked at fossils from extinct flying reptiles known as pterosaurs. The scientists used both X-ray CT scanning and dissection techniques to look at the tongue anatomies of alligators and living birds, including the common pheasant, emu and redhead duck. Birds have thin, mobile tongues and Y-shaped hyoids. Their hyoids are two long, bony projections pointing toward the back of the mouth, and a central bony section that sits in the front of the mouth with the tongue wrapped around it. Muscles attach to these bony projections, allowing birds to move their tongues and stick them out. Most Dinosaurs Had Tongues Like Alligators "We take birds for granted, but they have crazy tongues," Clarke said. "The way that tongue is able to protrude so far is that these little skinny bones are super, super long – they are so long that in a hummingbird they wrap over the surface of the skull into the nose holes." She added, "We know that bird tongues are highly mobile." The scientists needed to learn what is unique to bird tongues and when certain traits started to appear in reptile dinosaur tongues, according to Clarke. The team found that dinosaurs that evolved closer to birds, such as microraptors, had hyoids similar to, but shorter than, those of modern birds. Long complex hyoids were also found in pterosaurs, a group of species of flying reptiles. However, the majority of dinosaurs were found to have a simple, short hyoid rather like modern alligators. An alligator's large, fleshy tongue is fixed to the floor of its mouth, with a broad, short piece of cartilage at the back rather than the longer bony support seen in birds. This, say the researchers, suggests dinosaurs could not have waggled their tongues, let alone stuck them out. The exception, notes Clarke, was a group of plant-eating dinosaurs known as ornithischians, which includes beasts such as Triceratops, which were found to have an unusual, complex hyoid. Feeding Habits Dictated Tongue Evolution While the team says it is not clear why some dinosaurs and birds evolved more mobile tongues, they suggest it comes down to feeding habits. Crocodiles and alligators, like many meat-eating dinosaurs, do little chewing. Instead, they use a "tear and gulp" approach to table manners that does not require a mobile tongue. Herbivorous dinosaurs like Triceratops needed to chew, while birds have a variety of feeding habits borne of their lifestyle. "Once you have things that are eating seeds like birds, that are eating smaller prey items, then there seems to be elaboration of the tongue," Clarke said. "Once there are wings instead of mobile forelimbs then I think there is more pressure on the tongue to participate in positioning food or food processing, moving food in the mouth." Stephen Brusatte is a paleontologist at the University of Edinburgh in Scotland. He was not involved in the study, but welcomed the research. "It turns out that most dinosaurs have the very simple hyoid bones of modern crocodiles, which anchor a tongue that is pretty much glued to the floor of the mouth," he said. "A cousin of T. rex called Yutyrannus has this type of hyoid bone, as do almost all other dinosaurs." Because of this, it's reasonable to conclude that T. rex did as well, Brusatte said. "Those images in 'Jurassic Park' of the T. rex sticking its tongue out like a lizard as it prepares to devour its prey are probably wrong," Brusatte said.