Are tapirs tapering off? Tapirs have a happy life at the Ticuantepe Zoo. It is located in Nicaragua, a country in Central America. The tapirs relax in the bushes and get plenty to eat.  Tapirs in the wild do not have such an easy life. People are taking over the land where they live in Central America. Tapirs are disappearing.  Some people are afraid they will die out. They are making plans to save the tapirs.  The brown animals are sort of like pigs. They have large, bent noses.  At the zoo, the tapirs eat 20 pounds of leaves, fruit and horse feed. They get weighed and are watched on cameras. One of the boy tapirs is called Pamka. He is 3 years old. The Baird's tapir is one kind of tapir. It lives in the woods. This is its habitat.  Pamka is a Baird's tapir. There are fewer than 800 of them left in Nicaragua. Many other kinds of tapirs have already died out.  Eduardo Sacasa is a wildlife expert who runs a program for tapirs. People think the Baird's tapir might die out, too. Sacasa said it is against the law to hunt or sell tapirs. It still happens, though, he said. People eat the tapirs, he said.  At Ticuantepe Zoo, they want tapirs to have babies. It is not easy because pregnancy takes more than a year. Tapirs have only one baby at a time. Three of the tapirs are pregnant, including Rosita and Pueblana.  Soon, others from the zoo may be released into the wild, Sacasa said. It will happen only if experts believe they will not be killed, he said. Tilba is 2 years old. He will be taken to a wildlife park on Nicaragua's Caribbean coast. His young age gives him a good chance of getting used to the wild. Without protection plans, 4 out of every 5 tapirs left could be lost, some say. Already, more than half of them are gone. Tapirs do not go far from their homes in the wild. Changing their environment puts their lives in danger. It is a big worry because much of Central America's forest is gone. People have been moving into the tapirs' habitat for many years. They have cut down the trees.  Sacasa said other animals also are in danger in Nicaragua. They include the anteater, jaguar and the white-headed capuchin monkey.