Are tapirs tapering off? Thirteen tapirs relax in the bushes of Ticuantepe Zoo in eastern Nicaragua. Their bellies plump with leaves and fruit, they are happily ignorant of the danger faced by their kind.  These tapirs were born in a pen near the country's Masaya Volcano, as part of a plan to save their endangered species. The brown, pig-like animals have curving noses. They are the largest land mammals in Central America.  Each day they eat 20 pounds of leaves, fruit and horse feed. The tapirs at Ticuantepe Zoo are regularly weighed and watched by cameras. "Here, they're well fed," said Eduardo Sacasa, a wildlife expert who runs a program for them. In some cases, they are fed too much. One of the males, called Pamka, was put on a diet because "he is too fat." He is 3 years old. Several factors have reduced the size of the woodland home area of the Baird's tapir. Many humans have moved into the tapir's habitat. They have cut down trees and changed the ecosystem. The Baird's tapir is one of five tapir species left in the world. Human and cat predators have helped to wipe out 16 other tapir species.  There are fewer than 800 tapirs left in Nicaragua. The Baird's tapir is considered at risk of extinction by the International Union for Conservation of Nature, or IUCN. Sacasa said hunting and selling tapirs are against the law but still go on. People eat the animals, he said.  At Ticuantepe Zoo, there are efforts for tapirs to have babies. However, that's no easy task. Pregnancy is long, at 14 months, and females have only one baby at a time. Three of the females are pregnant, including Rosita, who is 12 years old, and Pueblana. She is 9 years old. Soon, others from the zoo will be released into the wild, but only if experts believe they won't be killed, Sacasa said. Three years ago, a couple of tapirs were about to be released. Suddenly, the release was canceled. It was uncertain whether the tapirs would be safe.  Tilba is a male who is 2 years old. He is one of the animals to be taken by helicopter to a hard-to-reach wildlife park on Nicaragua's Caribbean coast. His young age gives him a good chance of adapting to the wild. Sacasa began studying tapir behavior two decades ago. He worked with an American expert from Michigan State University, Christopher Jordan. Sacasa explained how they keep an eye on the animals after they are released. They track them through satellite-linked collars and about 150 cameras in the jungle. In all of Central America, there are about 3,000 Baird's tapirs left, environmental groups say. Without protection measures, 4 out of every 5 tapirs left could be lost, the IUCN said. Already, their population has dropped by more than half over the past three generations. Largely inactive, tapirs are awake more often at night. They do not roam far from their homes. Changes to their environment put the tapirs' lives at risk. This is a big concern because almost three-fourths of Central America's woodland has disappeared in 40 years, the IUCN says. Jaime Incer is a scientist who advises the government. In Nicaragua, the tapirs that lived on the west coast have mostly disappeared, he said. Incer said it could get worse. Each year the country loses more forest, he said. Sacasa said other animals are at risk in Nicaragua. They include the anteater, jaguar, howler monkey and the white-headed capuchin monkey. The government plans to have a company carve a huge canal across the country. The plan has worried many people. The canal is expected to damage the habitats of many animals.