Are tapirs tapering off? Thirteen tapirs relax in the bushes of Ticuantepe Zoo, in eastern Nicaragua, their bellies plump with leaves and fruit. They are happily unaware of the danger faced by others of their kind. The big, brown, pig-like animals with sloping snouts are the largest land mammals in Central America. These tapirs were born in an enclosure a short distance from the country's Masaya Volcano, as part of a plan to save their endangered species. Each day they eat about 20 pounds of leaves, fruit and horse feed. They are regularly weighed and monitored by cameras. "Here, they're well fed," said Eduardo Sacasa, a wildlife expert who runs the reproductive program. In some cases, too much so: One of the males, a 3-year-old called Pamka, was put on a diet because "he is too fat." The presence of humans and global warming, the heating up of Earth's climate, have reduced the size of the woodland habitat of the Baird's tapir. It is one of five tapir species left in the world. These factors, along with human and cat predators, have helped to wipe out 16 other tapir species. Pamka and his fellow herbivores are among the fewer than 800 of the species left in Nicaragua. The Baird's tapir is considered at risk of extinction by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). It is the "most threatened" four-footed animal in Nicaragua, Sacasa said. It faces "flat-out deforestation, encroaching farmland, illegal sales and poaching because people eat them," he said. The hope is that the tapirs in Ticuantepe Zoo will reproduce. That's no easy task, though. Pregnancy is long, at 14 months, and females only have one baby at a time. Three of the females are pregnant, including Rosita, a 12-year-old tapir, and Pueblana, 9 years old. Soon, others being kept at the zoo will be released into the wild, but only if there are guarantees they won't be killed, Sacasa said. Three years ago, a couple of tapirs were about to be freed, but their release was canceled at the last minute. It was too uncertain whether they would be safe.  Tilba, a 2-year-old male, is one of the animals to be taken by army helicopter to a hard-to-access reserve on Nicaragua's Caribbean coast. His young age makes him a good candidate to adapt to the wild. Once in his new habitat, he will be joined by a female chosen by the conservation team as his potential mate. Sacasa began studying tapir behavior two decades ago with an American expert from Michigan State University, Christopher Jordan. Sacasa explained how they keep close tabs on the animals even after they are released. They track them through satellite-linked collars and some 150 cameras dotted through the jungle. His ambition is to eventually develop the conservation program and present "alternative ways to save the tapir" to the government. Across all of Central America, there are an estimated 3,000 Baird's tapirs left, according to environmental preservation organizations. That number could be cut by 80 percent in coming years if conservation measures aren't put in place, the IUCN warns. Already, their population has dropped by more than half over the past three generations. The animals use their long snouts to forage for food. They weigh between 440 and 660 pounds and have a life expectancy between 15 and 40 years. Largely inactive but awake more often at night, tapirs usually stay within a 6-mile radius within their habitat. Changing their immediate environment therefore directly puts their survival on the line. It is a big concern because 70 percent of Central America's woodland has disappeared in 40 years, according to the IUCN. Jaime Incer is a geographer who advises the government on environmental issues. In Nicaragua, the tapirs that lived on the western Pacific coast have largely disappeared, he told reporters. Incer said that trend looked certain to worsen. Each year the country loses between 125,000 to 150,000 acres of forest, he said. That's close to the size of Chicago, Illinois.  Sacasa said that the tapir is one of 28 mammals threatened by damage to Nicaragua's ecosystems. Others include the anteater, jaguar, puma, howler monkey and the white-headed capuchin monkey. The government plans to have a Chinese company carve a massive canal across the country to rival the waterway in Panama. The plan has further stirred ecologists' concerns. The project calls for works along 173 miles. It would affect 17 at-risk species including the tapir, according to an environmental report carried out by the company HKND.