Are tapirs tapering off? Thirteen tapirs lounge in the bushes of Ticuantepe Zoo, in eastern Nicaragua, their bellies plump with leaves and fruit. They are happily unaware of the peril faced by their kind. The largest land mammals in Central America, the brown, pig-like animals with sloping snouts came into the world in captivity. They were born in an enclosure a short distance from the country's Masaya Volcano, under a plan to save their endangered species. Each day they eat about 20 pounds of leaves, fruit and horse feed and are regularly weighed and monitored by cameras. "Here, they're well fed," said Eduardo Sacasa, a wildlife expert who runs the tapir reproductive program. In some cases, too much so: One of the males, a 3-year-old called Pamka, was put on a diet because "he is too fat." ## Habitat Threatened Human encroachment and climate change have decimated the woodland habitat of the Baird's tapir, one of five tapir species left in the world. These factors, along with human and feline predators like ocelots and jaguars, have helped to wipe out 16 other tapir species. Pamka and his fellow herbivores are among no more than 800 tapirs left in Nicaragua. The Baird's tapir, considered at risk of extinction by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), is the "most threatened" four-footed animal in Nicaragua, Sacasa said. It faces "flat-out deforestation, encroaching farmland, illegal sales and poaching because people eat them," he said. In Ticuantepe Zoo, efforts are deployed to have them reproduce. But that's no easy task, as gestation is long 14 months and females give birth to only one offspring at a time. Three of the females are pregnant, including Rosita, a 12-year-old tapir, and Pueblana, 9 years old. ## Precautions Taken Soon, others being kept at the zoo will be released into the wild but only if there are guarantees they won't be killed, Sacasa said. Three years ago, a couple of tapirs were about to be freed, but their release was canceled at the last minute when there was uncertainty about their safety. Tilba, a 2-year-old male, is one of the animals designated to be taken by army helicopter to a hard-to-access reserve on Nicaragua's Caribbean coast. His young age makes him a good candidate to adapt to the wild. Once in his new habitat, he will be joined by a female chosen by the conservation team as his potential mate. Sacasa, who began studying tapir behavior two decades ago with an American expert from Michigan State University, Christopher Jordan, explained how they keep close tabs on the animals even after they are set free. They track them through satellite-linked collars and some 150 cameras dotted through the jungle. His ambition is to eventually develop the conservation program and present "alternative ways to save the tapir" to the government.  ## Baird's Numbers Dropping Across all of Central America, there are an estimated 3,000 Baird's tapirs left, according to environmental preservation organizations. That number could be cut by 80 percent in coming years if conservation measures aren't put in place, the IUCN warns in a report. Already, their population has dropped by more than half over the past three generations. The animals use their long snouts to forage for food. They weigh between 440 and 660 pounds and have a life expectancy between 15 and 40 years. Largely sedentary but mostly active at night, they usually stay within a 6-mile radius within their habitat. Altering their immediate environment therefore directly puts their survival on the line a big concern, given that 70 percent of Central America's woodland has disappeared in 40 years, according to the IUCN. ## West Nicaragua Has Few Remaining In Nicaragua, the tapirs that lived on the Pacific coast have largely disappeared, a geographer who advises the government, Jaime Incer, said. That trend looked certain to worsen as each year the country loses between 50,000 and 60,000 hectares (125,000 to 150,000 acres) of forest, he said. Sacasa said that the tapir is one of 28 mammals threatened by damage to Nicaragua's ecosystem. Others include the anteater, jaguar, puma, howler monkey and the white-headed capuchin monkey. A plan by the government to have a Chinese company carve a massive canal across the country, to rival the waterway in Panama, has further stirred ecologists' concerns. The project calls for works along 278 kilometers (173 miles). It would affect 17 at-risk species including the tapir, according to an environmental impact report carried out by the company HKND.