Custom-made elephant sandals WASHINGTON, D.C. — Shanthi the elephant's feet hurt. She has a disease called arthritis. It can make walking around painful. She also has cracks in her toenails and sores on her skin. Shanthi lives at the National Zoo in Washington, D.C. She is an Asian elephant and is 41 years old. Zoo workers found the answer to Shanthi's foot problem. She is now wearing Washington's largest pair of sandals. They are really more like boots made just for Shanthi. They are about a size 20 and are extra, extra wide. A single shoe looks like a rubber birdbath. Elephants have five toenails on their front feet. They usually have four toenails on their back feet. An elephant's foot can be almost 20 inches across when it is standing. Its foot is 6 inches smaller when it is lifted up in the air. Tony Barthel is in charge of the zoo's elephants. He said that the zoo carefully looks after the elephants' feet. It is one of the things it can do to keep them healthy. Zoo veterinarians take care of Shanthi's arthritis. They give her shots. They rub medicine on her nails and skin. They also must keep dirt out of the cracks in her feet. This is all hard. Especially keeping the medicine on long enough to work. Elephants are smart and curious. Their trunks are good at taking off bandages. Boots worked on elephants at other zoos. The National Zoo decided to give them a try. Teva is a shoe company in California. It made a pair of elephant shoes in 2004\. In 2011, it created a tiny sandal for the Santa Barbara Zoo. A Humboldt penguin there named Lucky had a problem foot. What does Shanthi think of wearing shoes? At first, she was not sure how to walk in them, Barthel said. She was very careful.  Now Shanthi is used to her shoes. Don Neiffer is the zoo's chief veterinarian. He said the shoes made her life better and more comfortable. Deborah Flinkman is an elephant keeper. One afternoon, she knelt at Shanthi's feet. Flinkman tapped her finger on a wrinkly gray toe. Shanthi lifted her left foot and Flinkman slid a boot under it. Shanthi put her foot down. "Perfect," Flinkman said. "What a good girl."