Custom-made elephant sandals WASHINGTON, D.C. — Do your feet ever hurt after standing on them for too long? Well, imagine if you weighed 9,000 pounds. That's the problem for Shanthi, an Asian elephant at the National Zoo in Washington, D.C. Shanthi is 41 years old and has arthritis. It is a joint disease that can make getting around painful. It has also led to problems in Shanthi's front feet, including cracks in her toenails and sores on her skin. The answer is Washington's largest pair of Teva-brand sandals. Actually, they are more like boots, made just for Shanthi in about a size 20, and they are really, really extra wide. A single shoe looks like a rubber birdbath. Elephants have five toenails on their front feet and usually four on their back feet. An elephant's foot can be close to 20 inches across when the elephant is standing. It is 6 inches smaller when the elephant lifts up its feet. "We put a lot of attention into elephant feet," the zoo's Tony Barthel said. He is in charge of the Elephant Trails and Cheetah Conservation Station exhibits. "It's one of the things we can do to help ensure that they're healthy." Zoo workers regularly check the elephants' feet. The animals get pedicures and occasional X-rays. Zoo veterinarians treat Shanthi's arthritis with shots and rub medicine on her nails and skin. They also need to keep dirt out of the cracks in her feet. This all became a challenge, especially keeping the medicine on long enough for it to work. Elephants are intelligent and curious animals. Their trunks are especially good at unwrapping bandages. Boots had been used successfully at other zoos, so the National Zoo decided to give them a try. There is no good way to measure an elephant's foot so the zoo made a 3-D scan of Shanthi's feet and sent it to the Teva company in California. The footwear company had already had some interesting shoe requests. It made a pair of elephant shoes in 2004, and in 2011, created a tiny sandal for the Santa Barbara Zoo, where a Humboldt penguin named Lucky had a problem foot. Chris Hillyer works for Deckers Brands, which owns Teva. He flew to China to make sure the shoes were made right. Teva later gave the shoes to the zoo for free. What does Shanthi think of wearing shoes? At first, Barthel said, it was like when you "put a sock on a dog and they don't know how to walk," he said. "She was very careful about how she walked. That was an important part of the learning process." Now Shanthi takes the boots in stride. The arthritis treatment seems to be working. Shanthi is able to move around more and is not afraid to walk down the steep ramp to the pools, where she plays and rolls around. Don Neiffer is the zoo's chief veterinarian. He said the shoes made her life better and more comfortable. On a recent afternoon, Deborah Flinkman, an elephant keeper, carefully knelt at Shanthi's feet. The world's largest land mammal can be dangerous, after all. "If she stood a foot away, I wouldn't be able to do it," Flinkman said. Shanthi was standing up close, encouraged by the zookeeper's calm words and light touch. She especially liked the apple-flavored biscuits Flinkman offered. Flinkman tapped her finger on a wrinkly gray toe. Shanthi lifted her left foot and Flinkman slid a boot under it. "Perfect," Flinkman said. "What a good girl." She fastened the shoe. Then she said "Over," asking the elephant to turn 180 degrees and present her right foot. This Shanthi did, pausing only to grab some hay with her trunk. Shanthi lifted her right foot and, like Cinderella after the ball, carefully stepped into the boot. Many parents have more trouble getting their toddlers into a pair of sneakers.