Once thought nearly extinct in China, Siberian tigers are on the prowl, killing or mauling livestock in remote villages. Attacks on humans are rare due to Chinese respect for the tiger. JINTANG, China — Liu Xiangqing had never seen cows so scared in his entire life as a herder. Normally, at 6 a.m., they would be gathered together, contentedly chewing and grazing in the dawn light. But one morning last June, they were scattered through the pine scrub. They were pacing anxiously, their ears alert. Liu took a quick head count and realized one was missing, a 2-year-old bull. The remains were found, the tail and thighs missing, the entrails spilled out in the dirt. There was a gash in the neck; claw marks raked down the stomach. It was a sure sign: The Siberian tiger was back. “In my whole life, I’d never seen a real tiger, but I knew it couldn’t be anything else,” said Liu, 52. He grew up in this remote Chinese village wedged between the Russian and North Korean borders. The Siberian tiger is making a comeback. Once believed nearly extinct in China, the largest member of the cat family is being seen more often. A decade-long effort to restore its natural home by banning logging, hunting and trapping is bringing it back. Siberian tigers weigh as much as 675 pounds. Still, they are are elusive creatures that slink into the forest when humans approach. Villagers learn that a tiger has been on the prowl when they spot paw prints the size of melons. Or, as is happening more often in China, they discover that livestock are missing or mauled. Four cows were killed in five days in May in another village near the border. One of the largest of Liu’s cattle, a 1,300-pound bull, lost his tail to a tiger but stayed alive by fighting back. In March, a farmer investigating a noise pointed his flashlight into the darkness and saw a tiger with claws dug into a cow. He chased it away by banging a metal bucket and setting off a firecracker. The Chinese government says there are between 18 and 22 Siberian tigers living in the wild, far fewer than those in zoos, said Li Zhixing, 60. Li has worked for decades on tiger protection. Nobody knows the exact number, because the Chinese don’t have tracking collars on the tigers. But Li believes there could be as many as 40 now and that the population is growing. Li believes the number of tigers has doubled in the last decade. "The area populated by tigers has become much larger,” Li said. Li gives the credit to campaigns to restore forests in China and Russia. The latter country began tiger-protection efforts in the 1940s and has the largest population of Siberian tigers, between 400 and 900, according to the World Wildlife Fund. But in recent years, China has caught up and might even be moving ahead in creating areas in which tigers can thrive, Li said. “Russia has fewer people than China, so it is a better place for tigers. But they are doing a lot of logging and burning off of agriculture fields after harvest, and the tigers don’t like that,” said Li, a native of Hunchun, the largest city in the region. “It is not hard for a tiger to jump over the barbed-wire fences at the border and come to China.” Some Chinese people still buy illegal body parts of tigers for traditional medicine. The tigers were poached in India or killed in captivity. But wild tigers have not been hunted in China since the 1950s, Li said. In fact, hunting of all animals except rats is banned in China. The Forestry Ministry has set up 108,700 acres of forest in Jilin province as a wildlife preserve. In August, scientists released 37 deer into the preserve to attract tigers and leopards, another [endangered species](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species) native to the region. “If you want to protect tigers, you have to protect their food supply,” Zhang Changzhi said. He is a scientist with the World Wildlife Fund, which is sponsoring the project. Tigers are endangered throughout the world. Their population in the wild has dropped from an estimated 100,000 in the early 20th century to as few as 3,200 today. Siberian tigers, also known as Amur or Korean tigers, are among six surviving subspecies and are originally from the boreal forests, or taiga, of China, Russia and North Korea. Chinese efforts on behalf of the Siberian tiger have won worldwide praise among environmentalists. A 2010 report in the journal of the Yale School of Forestry &amp; Environmental Studies compared China’s preservation efforts favorably with India’s. It suggested that China might even earn the right to claim it “saved the tiger.” “We never go out into the mountains now alone. We are always in groups of two or three so there is somebody to scare off the tiger,” said Qi Shuyan, 46, who works on the same ranch in Jintang as Liu. Li, the tiger expert, says attacks are rare here because of Chinese respect for the tiger. Many people revere it as a mountain god. “There is a superstition here that a tiger will only attack you if you do something bad,” Li said. “Sometimes when people encounter a tiger, they don’t run, they just kneel and pray.”