Livestock in remote farms and villages in northern China, near the Russian and North Korean borders, are being attacked by Siberian tigers. The big cat is back from the brink of extinction. JINTANG, China — Liu Xiangqing has taken care of cows all his life. And he had never seen them so scared. Normally, at 6 a.m., they would be grazing in the dawn light. But one morning last June, they were scattered through the pine scrub, anxiously pacing. Liu took a quick head count and realized one was missing, a 2-year-old bull. The remains were located, the tail and legs missing, the guts spilled out in the dirt. There was a gash in the neck; claw marks raked down the belly. It was a sure sign: The Siberian tiger was back. “In my whole life, I’d never seen a real tiger, but I knew it couldn’t be anything else,” said Liu, 52. He grew up in this tiny Chinese village. It is wedged between China's borders with Russia and North Korea. The Siberian tiger is making a comeback. It was once believed to nearly have died out in China. But now the largest member of the cat family is being seen more often. A 10-year effort to restore its natural home by banning logging, hunting and trapping has helped it come back. Siberian tigers weigh as much as 675 pounds, but they are hard to spot. They slink into the forest when humans approach. Villagers learn that a tiger has been on the prowl when they spot paw prints the size of melons. Or they discover that livestock are missing or mauled. Four cows were killed in five days in May in another village near the border. One of the largest of Liu’s cattle lost his tail to a tiger. The 1,300-pound bull stayed alive by fighting back. In China, far fewer Siberian tigers live in the wild than in zoos. The government has counted between 18 and 22 for some years, said Li Zhixing, 60. Li has worked on tiger protection for many years. Nobody knows the exact number of Siberian tigers in the wild, because the Chinese don’t have tracking collars on the tigers. But Li believes there could be as many as 40 now and that the population is growing. Li thinks the number of tigers has doubled in the last 10 years. "The area populated by tigers has become much larger,” Li said. Efforts to restore forests in China and Russia is what helped, he said. Russia began protecting the tiger in the 1940s. It has the largest population of Siberian tigers, between 400 and 900, according to the World Wildlife Fund. But in recent years, China has caught up. It might even be moving ahead in creating areas for the tigers to live in, Li said. “Russia has fewer people than China, so it is a better place for tigers. But they are doing a lot of logging and burning off of agriculture fields after harvest," he said. "The tigers don’t like that.” Li, a native of Hunchun, the largest city in the region, added: “It is not hard for a tiger to jump over the barbed-wire fences at the border and come to China.” Some Chinese people still buy body parts of tigers that have been gotten in ways that are not legal. They are poached in India or killed in farms. But wild tigers have not been hunted in China since the 1950s. In fact, the hunting all animals except rats is banned in China. Here in Jilin province, the government has made a wildlife preserve. It contains 108,700 acres of forest. In August, scientists released 37 deer into the preserve. This was to attract tigers as well as leopards, another [endangered species](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species) in the region. “If you want to protect tigers, you have to protect their food supply,” Zhang Changzhi said. He is a scientist with the World Wildlife Fund, which is sponsoring the project. Tigers are endangered all over the world. Their population in the wild has fallen. There were an estimated 100,000 tigers in the early 20th century. And there are as few as 3,200 today. “We never go out into the mountains now alone. We are always in groups of two or three so there is somebody to scare off the tiger,” said Qi Shuyan, 46. He works on the same ranch in Jintang as Liu. Li, the tiger expert, says attacks on humans are rare here because of Chinese respect for the tiger. Many people revere it as a mountain god. “There is a superstition here that a tiger will only attack you if you do something bad,” Li said. “Sometimes when people encounter a tiger, they don’t run, they just kneel and pray.”