The big cats are making a comeback in northern China. They're attacking cattle in remote villages and farms. A wildlife preserve was created for the tigers, stocked with deer. JINTANG, China — Liu Xiangqing has taken care of cows all his life. And he had never seen them so scared. Normally, at 6 a.m., they would be grazing in the dawn light. But one morning last June, they were scattered through the pine scrub. Liu took a quick head count and realized that a 2-year-old bull was missing. Its remains were found, the tail and legs gone, the guts spilled out in the dirt. There was a gash in the neck; claw marks raked down the belly. It was a sure sign: The Siberian tiger was back. “In my whole life, I’d never seen a real tiger, but I knew it couldn’t be anything else,” said Liu, 52. He grew up in this tiny Chinese village between the borders with Russia and North Korea. The Siberian tiger is making a comeback. It was once believed to be nearly wiped out in China. But now the largest member of the cat family is being seen more often. It is the result of a 10-year effort to restore its natural home by banning logging, hunting and trapping. They weigh as much as 675 pounds. But Siberian tigers are hard to spot. They slink into the forest when humans come near. Villagers learn that a tiger has been on the prowl when they spot paw prints the size of melons. Or else they discover that livestock are missing or mauled. There are fewer Siberian tigers living in the wild than in zoos. The Chinese government has counted between 18 and 22 for some years, said Li Zhixing, 60. Li has worked on tiger protection for many years. Nobody knows the exact number because the Chinese don’t have tracking collars on the tigers. But Li thinks there could be as many as 40 now. He says the population is growing. Li believes the number of tigers has doubled in the last decade. "The area populated by tigers has become much larger,” he said. Efforts to restore forests in China and Russia helped. Russia began protecting the tigers in the 1940s. It has the largest population of Siberian tigers, between 400 and 900. But in recent years, China has caught up. It might even be moving ahead in creating areas for the tigers to live in, Li said. “Russia has fewer people than China, so it is a better place for tigers. But they are doing a lot of logging and burning off of agriculture fields after harvest," said Li. "The tigers don’t like that.” Li is from the largest city in the region. “It is not hard for a tiger to jump over the barbed-wire fences at the border." Some Chinese people still buy body parts of tigers. The parts are not legal. They are from tigers hunted in India or killed on farms. No one has hunted wild tigers in China since the 1950s. Hunting all animals except rats is banned in China. The government has made a wildlife preserve in Jilin province. It contains 108,700 acres of forest. In August, scientists released 37 deer into the preserve. This was to attract tigers as well as leopards, another [endangered species](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species) in the region. “If you want to protect tigers, you have to protect their food,” Zhang Changzhi said. He is a scientist with the World Wildlife Fund. It is sponsoring the project. Tigers are endangered all over the world. Their numbers in the wild have fallen. There was an estimated 100,000 in the early 20th century. Now there are as few as 3,200. “We never go out into the mountains now alone. We are always in groups of two or three so there is somebody to scare off the tiger,” said Qi Shuyan, 46. He works on the same ranch in Jintang as Liu. Li says attacks on humans are rare here. The Chinese respect tigers. Many people revere it as a mountain god. People believe a tiger will only attack you if you do something bad. “Sometimes when people encounter a tiger, they don’t run," Li said. "They just kneel and pray."