These tree frogs were thought to be extinct for more than a century. Now an Indian biologist has rediscovered them all around Asia. While they have survived, they could still be threatened. NEW DELHI, India — The bodies of two mysterious tree frogs are stored in London's Natural History Museum. They have been there for more than 100 years.  The frogs were collected by a British scientist named T.C. Jerdon. He found them in India in 1870.  For many years scientists believed frogs of this kind had died out. They were sure the two dead frogs in London were the only ones humans would ever see, All that changed in 2007\. The mystery frogs were rediscovered deep in an Indian jungle. They were found by a team led by Indian scientist Sathyabhama Das Biju. Biju is well known in India. He is nicknamed "The Frog Man." Since 2007 Biju has been carefully studying the mystery frogs. On Wednesday he released a report. It contains some big surprises. Biju says the frogs are very different from other frogs. Animals that can mate and have babies belong to what is known as a species. A group of different species can all belong to a larger grouping called a genus. Animals in a genus are closely related. However, they are too different to be the same species. Biju says the rediscovered frogs are different enough from other frogs to be part of a new genus. So far they are the only frog in their genus. Biju named the new genus Frankixalus. He named it after Franky Bossuyt, a favorite teacher of his.  The rediscovered frog will now be known as Frankixalus jerdonii. The second part of the name is in honor of T.C. Jerdon. Sadly, the rediscovered frogs are in danger of dying out. "This is an exciting find, but it doesn't mean the frogs are safe," Biju said.  Frankixalus jerdonii live in trees. Unfortunately, the part of northeast India where they were found is rapidly changing. More and more trees are being cut down to make way for new homes, roads and farms. Pollution has been increasing in the area too. All kinds of poisons are getting into the water and air. Frogs are very easily harmed by pollution. Many kinds of frogs around the world are dying out. Frankixalus jerdonii is particularly threatened because the trees it needs are disappearing quickly, Biju said. "We're all worried." The frogs were actually found by accident. In 2007 Biju and his the team were searching the forest for other animals. One night they suddenly heard the sounds of frogs from high up in the treetops. They quickly took a closer look. Biju thinks the frogs remained hidden so long because they live so high up. The animals live in tree holes up to 20 feet above ground. Most tree frogs live much lower down.  Biju discovered something else very unusual about the frogs. The mothers first lay eggs in a tree hole filled with water. When their tadpole babies hatch, the mothers feed them with unfertilized eggs. An unfertilized egg is an egg that can never become a baby frog. The way the mother frogs behave is amazing, Biju said. "Just imagine, the mother is coming back over and over and dropping these eggs for her babies to eat." The tadpoles have eyes on the top of their heads. Biju thinks this makes it easier for them to see eggs dropping into their hole. The fully grown frogs are about as big as a golf ball. Unlike other frogs, they mostly eat plants. Usually, frogs eat insects. Frankixalus jerdonii is not the first frog Biju has discovered. In fact, he discovered 89 of the 350 frog species known to be in India.