These tree frogs were thought to be extinct for more than a century. Now an Indian biologist has rediscovered them all around Asia. While they have survived, they could still be threatened. NEW DELHI, India — For more than a century, two mysterious tree frog specimens have been housed at London's Natural History Museum. Collected by a British scientist in 1870, the frogs were long assumed to be part of a vanished species. In 2007 that all changed. A group of scientists, led by renowned Indian biologist Sathyabhama Das Biju, rediscovered the frogs deep in the jungles of northeast India.  Biju and his team have been carefully studying the rediscovered tree frogs since 2007\. On Wednesday they released a report containing some surprising findings.  Biju says his studies prove the frogs should be considered part of a new genus, rather than simply as another species of an already known type of frog. When it comes to the classification of animals, a genus is one step higher than a species, and one step below a family.  Biju decided the rediscovered frog was part of a new genus after a study of its genetic makeup, which proved to be unique. There are now 18 tree frog genera known worldwide. Biju has named the new frog genus Frankixalus, after Franky Bossuyt, a former teacher of his. The rediscovered frogs themselves have been named Frankixalus jerdonii. The second part of the name is a tribute to T.C. Jerdon, the 19th-century scientist who first collected the frogs.  So far Frankixalus jerdonii is the only confirmed member of its genus, though a frog found in China may also belong. While the rediscovered frogs are not extinct, they could still be threatened by development. "This is an exciting find, but it doesn't mean the frogs are safe," Biju said. His hope is that the discovery will lead to more awareness of the threat rapid and uncontrolled development poses to the animals.  The frogs were found at high altitudes in four northeast Indian states that are home to a wide array of animals. The region's tropical forests are quickly disappearing because of programs to cut trees, plant rice, expand human settlements and build roads. Some of the forest areas where Biju's team collected frogs in 2007 and 2008 were already slashed and burned by 2014.  Industrial growth amid India's decade-long economic boom has also increased pollution, to which frogs are particularly sensitive.  Along with toads, newts, and salamanders, frogs belong to a class of animals known as amphibians. Of the more than 7,000 amphibian species known globally, about 32 percent are threatened with extinction. Frankixalus jerdonii is threatened simply because the environmental conditions it need to survive are fast disappearing, Biju said. "We're lucky in a way to have found it before that happens, but we're all worried." Finding the frogs was an accident. The team had been searching the forest floor for other amphibians in 2007 when, one night, "we heard a full musical orchestra coming from the treetops. It was magical. Of course we had to investigate," Biju said. The frogs had long been considered lost to science. The first — and only — previously known specimens were collected in 1870 by Jerdon, who found them in the forests of Darjeeling, India.  Biju believes the frogs remained hidden so long because of their secretive lifestyle —the animals live in tree holes at heights up to 20 feet above ground. Most tree frogs live in shrubs or tree holes closer to the ground. However, other experts suggest that the frogs probably remained in obscurity simply because there are so few scientists working in the remote region. "This part of Southeast Asia, in particular, is poorly inventoried," said U.S. scientist James Hanken. While the rediscovery is "remarkable," Hanken said, it does not alter the fact that frog species are becoming extinct at an alarming rate worldwide. Biju's study of the rediscovered tree frogs documents some unusual behavior: the females lay fertilized eggs in a tree hole filled with water, and then return at regular intervals after the tadpoles hatch to feed them with unfertilized eggs. "This is incredible," Biju said. "Just imagine, the mother is coming back over and over and dropping these eggs for her babies to eat." Rather than teeth, the tadpoles have smooth, suction-like mouths to pull in the eggs. Their eyes are positioned on the top of their heads, rather than on the sides. Biju suggested the feature may help the tadpoles see eggs being dropped by mother frogs into the hole during feeding time. Fully grown, the frogs are about as big as a golf ball. Uniquely, they feed mostly on vegetation, rather than insects and larvae. Frogs have been around for 350 million years and have evolved in countless different ways, said Biju, who is known in India by the nickname "The Frog Man." Biju has discovered 89 of the 350 or so frog species known to be in the country. Scientists said Biju's work is extremely important both for understanding the planet's biological diversity and for raising awareness about the need for conservation. Already, Australia has seen the extinction of one frog species that brooded tadpoles in its stomach. Central America recently lost its brightly colored golden toad. Compared to some other kinds of threatened animals, amphibians are often overlooked by the public, said scientist Robin Moore. The excitement created by species discoveries and rediscoveries can help bring much needed attention. In turn, that attention and excitement can aid in efforts to save threatened amphibian species.  "Wonder and inspiration tend to be more powerful motivators than despair," Moore said.