These tree frogs were thought to be extinct for more than a century. Now an Indian biologist has rediscovered them all around Asia. While they have survived, they could still be threatened. NEW DELHI, India — In 1870 scientist T.C. Jerdon found two strange frogs in India. He brought them back to London.  No more of the frogs were found. Scientists thought they must have all died out. ## The Frog Man's Big Surprise Then in 2007 scientists got a big surprise. The frogs were found again. They were living deep in an Indian forest.  The frogs were found by an Indian scientist. His name is Sathyabhama Das Biju. People all over India know Biju. He is nicknamed "The Frog Man." Biju carefully studied the frogs he found. He has just put out a report. It has some big surprises in it. ## Frankixalus jerdonii: What A Name! Biju has named the frogs Frankixalus jerdonii. He says they are very different from other frogs. The frogs live very high up. They live in tree holes up to 20 feet above ground. Most tree frogs live much closer to the ground.  The frog mothers lay eggs in a tree hole filled with water. Then, they wait for babies to break out of the eggs. The babies are called tadpoles. Tadpoles do not look like adult frogs. Most tadpoles live in the water. Adult frogs can live in the water and on land. ## Here Tadpoles, Have Some Eggs The way the mothers feed their tadpoles is very different from other frogs. They feed them with unfertilized eggs. An unfertilized egg cannot turn into a baby frog. The mothers drop the eggs into the tree hole. The tadpoles have eyes on the top of their heads. Biju thinks this makes it easier for them to see eggs dropping into their hole. After the tadpoles grow into frogs they mostly eat plants. Other frogs are different. They mostly eat bugs.  ## As Big As A Golf Ball Grownup Frankixalus jerdonii are very small. They are only as big as a golf ball.  Unfortunately, the frogs are in trouble. Frankixalus jerdonii live in trees. Their part of India is changing quickly. More and more trees are being cut down. They are being cut down to make way for new homes, roads and farms. ## Worried About Trees The trees Frankixalus jerdonii need to live are going away very quickly, Biju said. "We're all worried." Frankixalus jerdonii is not the first frog Biju has found. He has found 89 new kinds of frogs in India.