These tree frogs were thought to be extinct for more than a century. Now an Indian biologist has rediscovered them all around Asia. While they have survived, they could still be threatened. NEW DELHI, India — The remains of two mysterious tree frogs have been housed at London's Natural History Museum for more than a century. The frogs were collected by a British scientist in 1870\. For many years scientists believed their species had vanished off the face of the Earth.  Then in 2007 the mystery frogs were rediscovered deep in an Indian jungle. They were found by a team led by Sathyabhama Das Biju, a well-known Indian scientist known as "The Frog Man."  Since 2007, Biju and his team have been carefully studying the long-lost frogs. On Wednesday they released a report containing some surprising findings. Biju says the frogs are different enough from other frogs to be part of a new genus. A genus is one of the groupings into which scientists divide animals. It is a step higher than a species, and one step below a family. There are now 18 tree frog genera known worldwide. Biju has named the new genus Frankixalus, in honor of Franky Bossuyt, an old science teacher of his.  The rediscovered frog will now be known as Frankixalus jerdonii. The second part of the name refers to T.C. Jerdon, the 19th-century scientist who first collected the frogs. So far Frankixalus jerdonii is the only confirmed member of its genus, though a frog found in China may also belong. Sadly, the rediscovered frogs could be in danger of dying out. "This is an exciting find, but it doesn't mean the frogs are safe," Biju said.  The part of northeast India where the frogs live is rapidly changing. Frankixalus jerdonii live in trees, but the region's tropical forests are quickly disappearing. More and more trees are being cut down to make way for new homes, roads and rice farms. With all that building, pollution has been increasing in the area too. Frogs are very delicate, and are particularly likely to be harmed by pollution. Along with toads, newts, and salamanders, frogs belong to a class of animals known as amphibians. Of the more than 7,000 amphibian species known globally, about 32 percent are in danger of dying out. Frankixalus jerdonii is in particular danger of dying out because the environmental conditions it need to live are fast disappearing, Biju said. "We're lucky in a way to have found it before that happens, but we're all worried." Biju's hope is that his discovery will lead to more awareness of the threat to amphibians. Finding the frogs was an accident. In 2007 the team was searching the forest floor for other amphibians when one night, "we heard a full musical orchestra coming from the treetops. It was magical. Of course we had to investigate," Biju said. The frogs had long been considered lost to science. The first — and only — previously known specimens were collected in 1870 by Jerdon, who found them in the forests of Darjeeling, India.  Biju believes the frogs remained hidden from science so long because of their secretive lifestyle: the animals live in tree holes at heights up to 20 feet above ground. Most tree frogs live in shrubs or tree holes closer to the ground.  Biju's newly released study of Frankixalus jerdonii documents some unusual parenting behavior. Female frogs first lay eggs in a tree hole filled with water. When their tadpole babies hatch, the mothers return at regular intervals to feed them with unfertilized eggs. An unfertilized egg is an egg that can never develop into a tadpole. "This is incredible," Biju said. "Just imagine, the mother is coming back over and over and dropping these eggs for her babies to eat." The tadpoles have smooth, toothless mouths ideal for pulling in the eggs. Their eyes are positioned on the top of their heads, rather than on the sides. Biju suggested the feature may help the tadpoles see eggs being dropped by mother frogs into the hole during feeding time. The fully grown frogs are about as big as a golf ball. Uniquely, they feed mostly on plants, rather than insects. Frankixalus jerdonii is not the first frog Biju has discovered. In fact, he is responsible for discovering 89 of the 350 or so frog species known to be in India. Scientists say Biju's work is extremely important. It not only teaches us about the huge variety of amphibian species in the world, it also makes us more aware that so many of them are threatened.