A fossil unearthed in South Dakota shows a T. rex's tooth between fused vertebrae. Scientists say this means tyrannosaurus hunted its prey and didn't just scavenge dead dinosaurs. LOS ANGELES — The Tyrannosaurus rex from the movie “Jurassic Park” chases any prey that moves. Then it eats it with its enormous jaws and jagged teeth crushing the bones of its lunch. But scientists who study dinosaurs don’t necessarily agree with how the movie shows T. rex. Some of those paleontologists say it may have simply eaten dead animals it happened to find. Now scientists say they found evidence T. rex hunted its prey. The team dug up the 1.5-inch crown of a T. rex tooth lodged between the back bones of a hadrosaur. A hadrosaur was a plant-eating duck-billed dinosaur. The bones had grown around the chisel-shaped tooth. This indicates that the hadrosaur was alive when it was attacked, scientists said. Scientists have debated T. rex’s feeding behavior for more than a century. Fossils indicate the creatures were well-suited to hunting. They had long, jagged teeth, strong rear limbs and a massive skull. Paleontologists study animal and plant remains from hundreds of centuries ago. These are called fossils. Fossil remains with T. rex tooth marks, as well as partially eaten bones alongside T. rex remains, could show that the huge creatures ate meat. But the fossils could also mean that the prey was already dead before T. rex took its first bite. Experts on both sides have strongly defended their positions. Paleontologists needed to find signs of healing in an animal that had escaped an attack if they wanted to show that T. rex was a hunter. The tooth crown and back bones do just that, said paleontologist David Burnham. That doesn’t mean T. rex hunted everything it ate, he said. Fossils with teeth marks that do not have signs that the wound healed could show that the dinosaurs also ate dead animals. Large meat-eaters, like lions, feast on dead animals when they can. The same was true 65 million years ago, said paleontologist Thomas Holtz. “That’s food that doesn’t fight back,” Holtz said. “Why pass up a free meal?” Robert Feeney is an amateur paleontologist. He noticed two long bones sticking up from the ground during a 2007 dig in South Dakota. Further digging revealed that the two soup bowl-sized vertebrae were fused together, which is a sign of bone healing. The fossilwas moved to the University of Kansas in Lawrence. There, scientists used fine brushes, delicate dental instruments and a miniature sandblaster with baking soda to remove the remaining dirt. Then the researchers made another discovery: a tooth crown wedged between the back bones and surrounded by the healed bone growth. “It was a very exciting moment,” said Burnham. The team immediatley knew that the find was important. The team members used a medical scanner to take pictures of the tooth crown. Then they measured its jagged edges and other characteristics. The measurements matched up with T. rex teeth. The team did the same thing with the back bones. They compared their size and shape to those of other plant-eating animals. The bones were what you would expect in a hadrosaur. In fact, the bones came from the hadrosaur’s tail. Modern-day predators attack their prey by targeting the back end first, the authors wrote. That is something else that could show T. rex was a hunter. There are still doubters. Jack Horner is a paleontologist who was not part of the study. He said he’s still not convinced that T. rex was a predator. The find could show that the victim was lying down when it was attacked. Perhaps the T. rex mistook it for a dead animal and then ran away once it realized its intended meal was still alive, he said. All the scientists know is that the T. rex “bit a live animal, and the animal lived,” Horner said. Study leader Robert DePalma said Horner’s scenario was “implausible.” Dinosaurs have been dead for a long time. Paleontologists can’t watch them in the wild. So they’ll “probably never know” whether T. rex preferred scavenging or hunting, Holtz said. The new fossil helps give a tiny snapshot, though. “Sometimes it’s the little bones that count," he said. Tyrannosaurus means tyrant lizard in Latin. And rex means king in Latin. So it seems T. rex actually did live up to its name so many millions of years ago.