A hadrosaur fossil dug up in South Dakota had a T. rex tooth in it. Scientists say this shows T. rex hunted some of its food. Still, the debate continues between predator and scavenger. LOS ANGELES — The Tyrannosaurus rex from the movie “Jurassic Park” chases any animal that moves. Then it eats it. Its enormous jaws and jagged teeth crush the bones of its meal. But scientists who study dinosaurs don’t all agree with how the movie shows T. rex. Scientists who study dinosaurs are called paleontologists. Some paleontologists say T. rex may have simply found dead animals and eaten them. Now scientists say they found evidence T. rex hunted what it ate. A team working in South Dakota dug up part of a T. rex tooth. It was stuck between the back bones of a hadrosaur. A hadrosaur was a plant-eating duck-billed dinosaur. The bones had grown around the chisel-shaped tooth. This means that the hadrosaur was alive when it was attacked, scientists said. Scientists have argued about how T. rex ate for more than a hundred years. The dinosaurs certainly were born to hunt. They had long, spiky teeth, strong rear limbs and a really big skull. Paleontologists study animal and plant remains from hundreds of centuries ago. These are called fossils. Scientists have found animal fossils with T. rex tooth marks. They have found partially eaten bones alongside T. rex remains. These could show that the huge creatures ate meat. But the fossils could also mean that the animal was already dead before T. rex took its first bite. That would make T. rex a scavenger, not a hunter. Experts on both sides have strongly defended their positions. Paleontologists needed to find signs that an animal had escaped an attack if they wanted to show that T. rex was a hunter. The animal would have had to have bitten, but healed. The tooth crown and back bones show just that, said paleontologist David Burnham. That doesn’t mean T. rex hunted everything it ate, he said. The dinosaurs could also have eaten dead animals. Large meat-eaters like lions feast on dead animals when they can. The same was true 65 million years ago, said paleontologist Thomas Holtz. “That’s food that doesn’t fight back,” Holtz said. “Why pass up a free meal?” Robert Feeney is an amateur paleontologist. He noticed two long bones sticking up from the ground during a 2007 dig in South Dakota. Further digging showed that the two soup bowl-sized vertebrae were fused together, which is a sign of bone healing. The fossil was moved to the University of Kansas in Lawrence. There, scientists carefully removed the rest of the dirt. Then the researchers made another discovery: a tooth crown wedged between the back bones and surrounded by the healed bone growth. “It was a very exciting moment,” said Burnham. The team immediately knew that the find was important. The team members used a medical scanner to take pictures of the tooth crown. Then they measured its jagged edges and other characteristics. The measurements matched up with T. rex teeth. The team did the same thing with the back bones. They compared their size and shape to those of other plant-eating animals. The bones were what you would expect in a hadrosaur. In fact, the bones came from the hadrosaur’s tail. Modern-day predators attack their prey by targeting the back end first, the authors wrote. That is something else that could show T. rex was a hunter. There are still doubters. Jack Horner is a paleontologist who was not part of the study. He said he’s still not convinced that T. rex was a predator. The bones could show that the victim was lying down when it was attacked. Maybe the T. rex thought it was a dead animal and then ran away once it realized it was still alive, he said. All the scientists know is that the T. rex “bit a live animal, and the animal lived,” Horner said. Study leader Robert DePalma said Horner’s scenario was not likely. Dinosaurs have been dead for a long time. Paleontologists can’t watch them in the wild. So they’ll “probably never know” whether T. rex preferred scavenging or hunting, Holtz said. The new fossil helps give a tiny snapshot, though. “Sometimes it’s the little bones that count," he said. Tyrannosaurus means tyrant lizard in Latin. And rex means king in Latin. So it seems T. rex actually did live up to its name so many millions of years ago.