When T. rex was just a runt NEW YORK, N.Y. — Tyrannosaurus rex was a large and strong hunter. The T. rex was once much smaller.  Over many years, these tyrannosaurs evolved or changed. The changes made them much bigger. Evolution is an idea, or theory, about the way that types of life, including animals, have developed over the years. Dinosaur bones were found in Central Asia. They are giving scientists an idea of how evolution happened in the T. rex. Hans-Dieter Sues of the Smithsonian's Museum in Washington, D.C., and Stephen Brusatte of the University of Edinburgh in Scotland, United Kingdom, are scientists. They were the two main authors on a paper about the bones. The bones belong to an earlier dinosaur that lived about 90 million years ago. The earlier dinosaur was about 10 to 12 feet long. It only weighed about 600 pounds. T. rex grew to be 40 feet long. The monstrous giant weighed more than 12,000 pounds. The name of the dinosaur is Timurlengia euotica (TEE'-mer-len-GEE'-uh yoo-OH-tih-kuh). It is named after Tamerlane, the ancient Asian king.  Euotica is the scientific name for the large inner ears.  The inner ears of Timurlengia euotica showed that it could hear low-pitched sounds. This helped it find smaller animals to eat that were at a distance. T. rex had similar ears. Timurlengia euotica, however, did not have the big teeth of the larger T. rex. The discovery of these bones helps fill in some missing facts. Bones from 100 million years ago show that some tyrannosaurs were the size of a horse. About 80 million years ago, the bones show the giant T. rex. The newly discovered bones show that Timurlengia euotica were still small 90 million years ago. The size boom happened pretty quickly, at least in dinosaur years. Scientist Thomas R. Holtz Jr. said the bone discovery helps us understand how dinosaurs evolved. Scientists now have a better understanding of how the different parts of the T. rex came together, Holtz said. He added that we now know where to dig for more bones.