Working on a fossil found in South Dakota, scientists saw a T. rex tooth wedged between fused vertebrae. That indicated an attack on live prey, and not T. rex dining on a dead dinosaur. LOS ANGELES — The Tyrannosaurus rex from the movie “Jurassic Park” chases any prey that moves, then devours it with a bone-crushing gnash of its enormous jaws and jagged teeth. But scientists who study dinosaurs don’t necessarily back Steven Spielberg’s portrayal of T. rex. Some of those paleontologists say it may have simply eaten the remains of dead animals it happened to find. Now scientists have found what they say is the first evidence that the dinosaur king hunted its prey. The find further supports the theory that T. rex ruled the rest of the food chain when it lived. That time was called the Cretaceous Period, which ended about 65 million years ago. The team, working in South Dakota, dug up the 1.5-inch crown of a T. rex tooth lodged between the vertebrae of a hadrosaur, a plant-eating duck-billed dinosaur. The vertebrae had grown around the chisel-shaped tooth. Scientists wrote that the fossil shows that the hadrosaur was alive when it was attacked. Their report was published Monday by the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Scientists have debated T. rex’s feeding behavior for more than a century. Fossils indicate the creatures were well-suited to hunting. They had long, jagged teeth, strong hind limbs and a massive skull. Fossil remains with T. rex tooth marks, as well as partially digested bones alongside T. rex remains, indicate that the massive creatures ate meat. But the fossils could also mean that the prey was already dead before T. rex took its first bite. Experts in both camps have strongly defended their positions. Paleontologists needed to find signs of healing in an animal that had escaped an attack if they wanted to show that T. rex was a hunter. The tooth crown in vertebrae is “the piece that settles the controversy,” said University of Kansas paleontologist David Burnham. That doesn’t mean T. rex hunted everything it ate, Burnham and his colleagues wrote. Tooth-punctured fossils lacking signs of wound healing could be evidence that the dinosaurs also fed on dead animals. Large carnivores (like lions) eat dead animals when they can. The same was true 65 million years ago, said Thomas Holtz, a paleontologist at the University of Maryland who was not part of the study. “That’s food that doesn’t fight back,” Holtz said. “Why pass up a free meal?” The hadrosaur vertebrae were dug up during a 2007 excavation meant to study Hell Creek’s prehistoric ecology. Robert Feeney is an amateur paleontologist with the Palm Beach Museum of Natural History in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. He noticed two long bones protruding from the ground. Further digging revealed that the two soup bowl-sized vertebrae were fused together, which is a sign of bone healing. The fossil was brought to the University of Kansas in Lawrence for examination. There, they used fine brushes, delicately tipped dental instruments and a miniature sandblaster with baking soda to remove the remaining dirt. Then the researchers made another discovery: a tooth crown wedged between the vertebrae and surrounded by the healed bone growth. “It was a very exciting moment,” said Burnham. The significance of the find was immediately apparent, he added: “We felt like the king was back.” The team members used a CT scanner to image the tooth crown and then measured its jagged edges and other characteristics. The measurements matched up with T. rex teeth. The team used a similar approach to identify the vertebrae. They compared their size and shape to those of other plant-eating species and found that they were what you would expect in a hadrosaur. They also determined that the vertebrae came from the hadrosaur’s tail. Modern-day predators attack their prey by targeting the back end first, the authors wrote. There are still doubters. Jack Horner is a Montana State University paleontologist who was not part of the study. He said he’s still not convinced that T. rex was a predator. The location of the large tooth on the underside of the hadrosaur vertebrae could indicate that the victim was lying down when it was attacked. Perhaps the T. rex mistook it for a dead animal and then fled once it realized its intended meal was still alive, he said. The authors of the study can conclude only that the T. rex “bit a live animal, and the animal lived,” Horner said. Study leader Robert DePalma said Horner’s scenario was “implausible.” “A scavenger doesn’t come across a food source and realize all of a sudden that it’s alive,” he said. Paleontologists can’t observe dinosaurs in the wild. So they’ll “probably never know” whether T. rex preferred scavenging or hunting, Holtz said. The new fossil helps give a tiny snapshot, though. “Not all the best fossils are totally complete specimens,” he added. “Sometimes it’s the little bones that count.” Tyrannosaurus means tyrant lizard in Latin. And rex means king in Latin. So it seems T. rex actually did live up to its name so many millions of years ago.