When T. rex was just a runt NEW YORK, N.Y. — The monstrous killer T. rex is the result of evolution. The theory states that life forms, from animals to plants, have developed over many, many years. Recently, fossil bones were discovered in Central Asia and are giving scientists an idea of how the dinosaur's evolution happened. T. rex and other tyrannosaurs were huge, powerful predators. They once were much smaller, but then evolved. These changes may have helped the monsters hunt better. Hans-Dieter Sues of the Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History in Washington, D.C., Stephen Brusatte of the University of Edinburgh in Scotland, United Kingdom, and others wrote a paper about the fossil bones. They reported finding bones of a previously unknown member of the changing family of the huge tyrannosaurs. This earlier dinosaur lived about 90 million years ago near the Aral Sea. It looked like a T. rex, but was 10 to 12 feet long and only weighed about 600 pounds. T. rex grew to be 40 to 50 feet long and weighed more than 12,000 pounds. The discovery helped fill in a gap in the tyrannosaur fossil record. Before that gap, which began some 100 million years ago, the smaller dinosaur was only about as big as a horse. Right after the gap, at about 80 million years ago, tyrannosaurs were giants like T. rex. The new finding shows they were still small just 90 million years ago. So the size boom happened pretty quickly, at least in dinosaur years. The inner ears of the newfound beast showed that it had the ability to hear low-pitched sounds, which might have helped in finding prey at a distance. The newly found dinosaur lacked the large, bone-snapping teeth and big sinuses found in T. rex, however. The creature is named Timurlengia euotica (TEE'-mer-len-GEE'-uh yoo-OH-tih-kuh). The name honors the ancient Central Asian ruler Tamerlane.  Euotica is the name for the large inner ears.  The fossils include a braincase and bones from the neck, back, tail, feet and hands. The creature isn't a direct ancestor of T. rex, but it indicates what such ancestors looked like, Brusatte said. The discovery helps scientists understand how "the (anatomical) parts got put together ... on the path to T-rex-hood," said Thomas R. Holtz Jr. of the University of Maryland. He didn't participate in the study. The discovery also suggests where to dig for more fossils to further investigate the dinosaur's evolution, Holtz said.