Where the antelope roam once again. SEATTLE, Wash. — For some 8,000 years, pronghorn antelope were at home on the lands around the Colville Indian Reservation in Washington state. Bones of the pronghorn antelope have been found in archaeological sites on the Native American reservation documenting the animals’ importance to the people here. However, pronghorn have been locally extinct out in Washington since the early 1900s. The animals became victims of over-hunting, agriculture and other disturbances after whites settled the area. In a risky bid 15 years in the making to bring pronghorn back to their lands, Colville biologists returned last month from Nevada to release 52 pronghorn captured there. The animals are delicate and difficult to relocate. Already, 11 of the antelope have died. Some were caught in fences, or likely the snow and predators did them in. Others, though, were found in the middle of open country, where they could have escaped any predator. This suggests other causes of death, including the fright of the capture, said Eric Krausz, a wildlife biologist for the Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation. “We are doing our due diligence to understand exactly what some of the causes were," Krausz said. "Hopefully it will teach us and other wildlife managers how to handle pronghorn during capture.” The tribe had planned to bring in 100 pronghorn but decided to do the relocation in two stages. “We will learn what the first group does,” Krausz said. “Then adjust for the second year.” Twelve distinct tribes live at Colville. Seven of the native peoples ancestral lands historically flourished with pronghorn. Pronghorn are important as a food source, and a spirit animal interwoven with tribal culture, said Guy Moura. He runs the department of history and archaeology at Colville. “This isn’t just about bringing an animal back to a place,” Krausz said. “It is about bringing them back to a people.” The relocation started in the high desert of Nevada. There, using a net gun, biologists in four hours gathered pronghorn genetically suited for release on the Colville reservation. Net gunners captured the pronghorn. Then they lifted them in slings to an outdoor workstation, according to Kodi Jo Jaspers, resource-protection biologist for the tribes. Biologists put radio collars on the adults and young animals. They took blood samples for DNA and disease testing, and administered shots of antibiotics. The collars have a battery life of four years. They are expected to help wildlife staff understand the animals’ daily and seasonal movement, and alert them to any deaths. Fawns were not collared because they are too small. After the initial workup, the animals were loaded into livestock trailers for the trip back to the reservation. It was tricky work; pronghorn have notoriously delicate legs, Krausz said. The pronghorn now have the task of learning to live in a new home with all of its dangers, from predators to fences. Richard Whitney, the wildlife manager for the tribes, said the pronghorn are not expected to compete with elk, deer or moose already on the reservation. Their diets are slightly different. The pronghorn were released in shrub-steppe habitat, a vast grasslands area. It is lush with shrubs, plants and native grasses. Those should all provide good food and cover for the pronghorn. There is also plenty of water. For now the tribe will closely monitor the collared pronghorn to see how the animals and their lands respond to one another. “We want stable and productive populations,” Krausz said. Hunting of pronghorns is not planned anytime soon. The pronghorn relocations are part of a bigger picture to help put back together the native wildlife of Washington. In 2011, the Yakama Nation brought 99 pronghorn back to their lands in Washington. About 150 were tracked on or near the Yakama reservation last winter. Plans are also in the works for rebuilding populations of many other animals such as Western bluebirds and sea otters.  “Any time a wild creature can be reintroduced to its native habitat, that is a good thing,” said Randall Friedlander, director for the tribes’ wildlife program. There was no charge for the pronghorn. They were a gift from Nevada as part of an overall effort to conserve and benefit the species. The Colville tribe paid for the helicopter time and other capture costs.