Where the antelope roam once again. SEATTLE, Wash. — For about 8,000 years, pronghorn antelope were at home on the lands that make up the Colville Indian Reservation in Washington state. Pronghorn antelope are large, fast animals with horns. Like deer, they have hooves. Bones of the pronghorn antelope have been found in archaeological digs on the reservation. For generations, the animals have been important to the Native American people here. However, pronghorn have been mostly gone from Washington since the early 1900s. They have been over-hunted and squeezed out by people coming to live in the area. Bringing pronghorn back to their lands is risky. It has been in the works for 15 years. Colville scientists returned last month from Nevada with 52 captured pronghorn. The animals are difficult to relocate. Already, 11 of the antelope have died. Some were caught in fences, or likely the snow and predators did them in. Others, though, were found in the middle of open country. They could have escaped any predator there. This suggests other causes of death. They might have been scared from the capture, said Eric Krausz, a wildlife biologist for the Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation. The tribe had planned to bring in 100 pronghorn but decided to do the relocation in two stages. “We will learn what the first group does,” Krausz said. “Then adjust for the second year.” Twelve tribes live at Colville. Seven of the native groups once had many pronghorn on their lands.  Pronghorn are important for food. They are also a spirit animal in tribal life, said Guy Moura. He works at the department of history and archaeology at Colville. “This isn’t just about bringing an animal back to a place,” Krausz said. “It is about bringing them back to a people.” The relocation started in the high desert of Nevada. There, using a net gun, biologists gathered pronghorn genetically able to live on the Colville reservation. Biologists put radio collars on the antelope. They took blood for DNA samples and disease testing, and gave them shots to fight off other diseases. The collars have a battery life of four years. They are expected to help scientists understand where the animals are going each day and season. The collars will also let them know of any deaths. Fawns were not collared because they are too small. After that, the animals were loaded into trailers for the trip back to the reservation. It was tricky work. Pronghorns have legs that can easily break. The pronghorn now have to learn to live in their new home with its dangers. Richard Whitney works with wildlife for the tribes. He said the pronghorn are not expected to have to fight with deer or moose already on the reservation for food. They eat slightly different things. The pronghorn were released in shrub-steppe area, or grasslands. It has plants that will be good food and cover for the pronghorn. There is also plenty of water. For now the tribe will closely watch the collared pronghorn to see how the animals get used to their new home. Hunting is not going to happen yet. The pronghorn relocations are part of a bigger picture. Many groups are trying to help put the wildlife of Washington state back together. In 2011, the Yakama Nation brought 99 pronghorn back to their lands in Washington. About 150 were tracked on or near the Yakama reservation last winter. Other groups are bringing back animals such as Western bluebirds and sea otters. There was no cost for the pronghorn. They were given by Nevada to help conserve the animal. The Colville tribe paid for the capture costs.