Where the antelope roam once again. SEATTLE, Wash. — For some 8,000 years, pronghorn antelope were at home on the sagebrush steppe in part of the Colville Indian Reservation in Washington state. Bones of the continent’s fastest land mammal have been found in archaeological sites on the reservation, documenting the animals’ importance to the people here. But pronghorn have been locally extinct in Washington since the early 1900s. The animals are victims of over-hunting, agricultural development and other disturbances after white settlement. In a risky bid 15 years in the making to bring pronghorn back to their lands, Colville biologists returned last month from Nevada to release 52 captured pronghorn. The animals are notoriously sensitive and difficult to relocate. Already, 11 of the animals have died. Some were caught in fences, or likely the snow and predators did them in. Others, though, were found in the middle of open country, where they could have escaped any predator — suggesting other causes, including the fright of the capture, said Eric Krausz, a wildlife biologist for the Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation. “We are doing our due diligence to understand exactly what some of the causes were. Hopefully it will teach us and other wildlife managers how to handle pronghorn during capture.” The tribe had planned to bring in 100 pronghorn but decided to do the relocation in two stages. “We will learn what the first group does,” Krausz said. “Then adjust for the second year.” The group of 12 distinct tribes at Colville includes seven native peoples whose ancestral lands in Eastern Washington and British Columbia historically flourished with pronghorn. Pronghorn are important as a food source, and a spirit animal interwoven with tribal culture, said Guy Moura. He is program manager of the department of history and archaeology at Colville. “The way our fish and wildlife program looks at this, it’s part of the natural environment and bringing things back to the way they were. That is important from an ecological sense, as well as there had to be spiritual connections,” Moura said. “That was lost when pronghorn left, and when they return again, it will develop.” In that way, bringing pronghorn back to the reservation is part of a vision that considers the tribe’s cultural fabric and landscape as an interwoven whole; the health of each influences the other. “This isn’t just about bringing an animal back to a place,” Krausz said. “It is about bringing them back to a people.” The relocation started in the high desert of Nevada. There, using a net gun, biologists in four hours gathered pronghorn genetically suited for release in the southwestern corner of the Colville reservation. Net gunners captured the pronghorn. Then they lifted anywhere from one to five of the animals at a time in slings to a central outdoor workstation, according to Kodi Jo Jaspers, a resource-protection biologist for the tribes. Biologists put radio collars on the adults and young animals. They took blood samples for DNA and disease testing, and administered shots of antibiotics. The collars have a battery life of four years. They are expected to help wildlife staff understand the animals’ daily and seasonal movement, and alert them to any deaths. Fawns were not collared because they are too small. After the initial workup, the animals were loaded into livestock trailers for the trip back to the reservation. It was tricky work as pronghorn have notoriously delicate legs, Krausz said. The pronghorn now have the task of learning their new landscape and its dangers, from predators to fences. Richard Whitney, the wildlife manager for the tribes, said the pronghorn are not expected to compete with elk, deer or moose already on the reservation. Their diets are slightly different. The pronghorn were released in shrub-steppe habitat, a vast grasslands area. It is lush with bitterbrush, basin big sage, and three-tipped sagebrush, along with other shrubs, plants and native grasses. Those should all provide good food and cover for the pronghorn. There is also plenty of water. For now the tribe will closely monitor the collared pronghorn to see how the animals and their lands respond to one another. “We want stable and productive populations,” Krausz said. No plans have been made yet to hunt the pronghorn. “We are returning a species to an ecosystem that hasn’t seen it for some time, and it will be interesting to see how the ecosystem responds, how everything responds,” he said. The Yakama Nation brought 99 pronghorn back to their lands in Washington as part of a reintroduction effort launched in January 2011\. Those pronghorn were the first to grace their reservation in more than 100 years. In a joint survey last winter by the tribe and Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, about 150 pronghorn were located on and off the reservation, said Nate Pamplin of the state’s wildlife program. “Initial indications are that a small herd is on its way to being established,” Pamplin said. The pronghorn relocations are part of a bigger picture to help put back together the native wildlife of Washington. They are rebuilding populations of many animals from Western bluebirds to pygmy rabbits, Western pond turtles to Oregon spotted frogs, fishers, sea otters, sage grouse, sharp tailed grouse and more. “Any time a wild creature can be reintroduced to its native habitat, that is a good thing,” Randall Friedlander, director for the tribes’ wildlife program said. There was no charge for the pronghorn, gifted from Nevada as part of an overall effort to conserve and benefit the species. The Colville tribe paid for the helicopter time and other capture costs.