Adult triceratops bones are discovered in the Colorado suburbs. Marco's Pizza is a local pizza shop in Thornton, Colorado. There is more excitement at the pizza shop than usual. News spread last week that rare dinosaur bones were found in the town.   Daniel Perez works at Marco's. He has lived in the suburbs of Denver, Colorado, all his life. Perez called the discovery "one of the biggest, most exciting things" he has ever experienced. He is considering giving some pizza to the crews working at the dinosaur site. He hopes they will pay him back by letting him look at the bones. Scientists who study fossils say the bones belong to a 66-million-year-old triceratops. It appears to be a big find, said Todd Barnes. He is head of communications in Thornton. Scientists hope to find most if not all of the dinosaur's bones. Already, the dinosaur's horns and shoulder bones have been located. The discovery was made two weeks ago on a patch of earth that is mostly loose sand. That should make it relatively easy to dig up. Things were kept quiet at first. The city was worried people might steal or damage the bones, Barnes said. Guards now watch the site around the clock, Barnes said. Most triceratops weighed more than 6 tons, about as much as an elephant. They stood about 10 feet tall and were 30 feet long. Scientists believe they moved slowly. Predators like the giant Tyrannosaurus rex could catch and eat them. National Geographic says the triceratops probably spent much of its time eating plants. Its beak and strong jaws were lined with rows of sharp teeth. It used them to tear and grind plants. The triceratops' head was 4 feet to 5 feet wide. It had three huge horns, a short one above the mouth and two long ones above its eyes. It used the horns to charge predators, such as T. rex. This one is different, though. Joe Sertich is a dinosaur expert in Denver. He explained that this one appears to be about half the size of those that lived farther north. Other triceratops found in the Denver area have been small, too.  "We don't really know why," he added. The new one might help them figure it out. The bones found in Thornton also appear to be spread out, Sertich said. He thinks this triceratops laid on the ground for a while after it died. "Things like T. rex would've come and taken bites out it," he said. That means they might also dig up some T. rex teeth. This could unlock new clues about them. Once the bones are fully uncovered, they will be wrapped in a cast to prevent them from breaking. When completely dug up, the bones will be sent to the museum. Scientists will clean them. Then they put them together and display them. Sertich has praised the workers who found the bones. Too often, people find bones without realizing how important they are. Workers often just carry on with their jobs. They end up destroying or building on top of history. "They knew what they found the moment they hit it," he said. They recognized the bones were important. They stopped what they were doing. "And they called the right people."