Adult triceratops bones are discovered in the Colorado suburbs. There's more excitement than usual at Marco's Pizza in Thornton, Colorado. News spread last week that a rare dinosaur skeleton was unearthed at a construction site up the street. General Manager Daniel Perez, 24, who has lived in the Denver suburbs all his life, called the discovery "one of the biggest, most exciting things" he has ever experienced. So exciting, in fact, he is considering donating some pies to the researchers and security crews working at the site. He is hopeful they will pay him back by offering a sneak peek at what paleontologists say is a 66-million-year-old adult triceratops. "Whatever we can get," Perez told The Washington Post newspaper, "we'll take it." It appears to be a comprehensive find, said Todd Barnes, Thornton's communications director. It is hoped most if not all of the dinosaur's full skeleton will be found. Already, the dinosaur's horns and shoulder bones have been located. The discovery was made two weeks ago on a patch of earth that is mostly loose sand, which should make it relatively easy to dig up, officials said. Eventually, the property will house a new facility for Thornton's police and fire departments. Things were kept quiet at first because city officials worried people might steal or damage the bones, Barnes said. "We scurried over the weekend to get security in place," he told The Post, "to make sure no one can take bones or damage them." The site is now patrolled by security around the clock, Barnes said. It is believed most triceratops weighed upward of 6 tons and stood about 10 feet tall and 30 feet long, according to a National Geographic fact sheet. Scientists believe the herbivores moved slowly. That made them prey for larger meat eaters, especially the giant Tyrannosaurus rex. "Like a modern-day rhinoceros, Triceratops probably spent much of its time grazing on plant matter," National Geographic says. Its beak and powerful jaws were lined with rows of sharp teeth. It used them to shred and grind plants. The triceratops' head was 4 to 5 feet wide with huge horns and a head plate. "It used its horns—a short one above its mouth and two long ones above its eyes – to charge predators, such as T. rex," National Geographic says. This one is unique, though. Joe Sertich is the dinosaur curator at the Denver Museum of Nature and Science. He explained that, as with other triceratops located in the Denver area, this one appears to be about half the size of those that lived farther north. "We don't really know why," he added. "Even though we have hundreds of triceratops from the American West, we only have three good skulls. And this might be one of the best skeletons to tell us why Denver triceratops is smaller than all of their cousins everywhere else." The bones found in Thornton also appear to be spread out, Sertich said. So he thinks this triceratops might have died and laid on the ground for a few days or weeks. "The bones fell apart, the flesh fell apart," he said. "Things like T. rex would've come and taken bites out it." That means they could possibly locate T. rex teeth as well. This could unlock new clues about the fearsome carnivores. Once the bones are fully uncovered, they will be wrapped in a protective cast to prevent them from breaking. When completely excavated, the fossils will be sent to the museum for cleaning, assembly and display. Sertich has praised the construction crew that made the find. Too often, the importance what has been found is unclear. Workers often just carry on with their jobs, destroying or building over important history in the process. "They knew what they found the moment they hit it," he said. "They stopped what they were doing, they recognized it as a significant and really important fossil. And they called the right people."