Adult triceratops bones are discovered in the Colorado suburbs. Marco's Pizza is in a town in Colorado. People were excited there last week. Rare dinosaur bones were found near the pizza shop. They are from a 66-million-year-old triceratops. Daniel Perez works at Marco's. He wants to send pizza to the people digging up the bones. He hopes they will then let him look at the bones.  Scientists hope to find almost all of the dinosaur's bones. So far, they have found its horns and shoulder bones. The bones were found in sand. They should be easy to dig up. At first, the bones were kept secret. The city was worried that people might take some bones or break them. Now there are guards by the bones. Most triceratops were about as big as an elephant. They ate plants. They moved slowly. The faster Tyrannosaurus rex could catch and eat them. T. rex was another huge dinosaur. The triceratops' head was almost 5 feet wide. It had three big horns. There was a short horn above its mouth. It had two long ones above its eyes. The triceratops used the horns to protect itself. Joe Sertich is a dinosaur expert. He said this triceratops is much smaller than most others. Others found in Colorado have been small, too.  "We don't really know why," he said. The new one might help them find the answer. The bones were not all in one place, Sertich said. Maybe a T. rex took bites out of it after it died. That means they might also dig up T. rex teeth. First, scientists will uncover the bones. They will brush away dirt and sand. Then they will cover the bones in a case. This will keep them from breaking. The scientists will then finish digging them up. After that, the bones will go to a museum. Scientists there will clean the bones. Then, they will put them together again. The bones will look like a skeleton. After that, people can look at them. Workers found the bones. They knew the bones were important right away. They stopped what they were doing. They called the right people to take a look.  Sertich thanked them for not hurting the bones.