Adult triceratops bones are discovered in the Colorado suburbs. There is more excitement than usual at Marco's Pizza in Thornton, Colorado. News spread last week that rare dinosaur bones were found at a construction site up the street. Daniel Perez is 24 years old. He is the manager at Marco's Pizza and has lived in the Denver suburbs all his life. Perez called the dino discovery "one of the biggest, most exciting things" he has ever experienced. He is considering donating some pizzas to the crews working at the site. He is hopeful they will pay him back by offering a sneak peek at what paleontologists, scientists who study fossils, say is a 66-million-year-old triceratops.  "Whatever we can get," Perez told The Washington Post newspaper, "we'll take it." ## Horns, Shoulder Bones Are The First Finds It appears to be a big find, said Todd Barnes, Thornton's head of communications. Scientists hope to find most if not all of the dinosaur's bones. Already, the dinosaur's horns and shoulder bones have been located. The discovery was made two weeks ago on a patch of earth that is mostly loose sand. That should make it relatively easy to dig up, officials say.  Things were kept quiet at first. City officials worried people might steal or damage the bones, Barnes said. The site is now watched by security around the clock, Barnes said. ## This One Is Different Most triceratops weighed more than 6 tons, according to a National Geographic fact sheet. They stood about 10 feet tall and were 30 feet long. Scientists believe they moved slowly. That made them prey for larger meat eaters, especially the giant Tyrannosaurus rex. "Like a modern-day rhinoceros, Triceratops probably spent much of its time grazing on plant matter," National Geographic says. Its beak and strong jaws were lined with rows of sharp teeth. It used them to tear and grind plants. The triceratops' head was 4 to 5 feet wide. It had huge horns and a head plate. "It used its horns — a short one above its mouth and two long ones above its eyes — to charge predators, such as T. rex." This one is different, though. Joe Sertich is a dinosaur expert at the Denver Museum of Nature and Science. He explained that this one appears to be about half the size of those that lived farther north in states such as the Dakotas and Montana. Other triceratops found in the Denver area also have been small.  "We don't really know why," he said. "Even though we have hundreds of triceratops from the American West, we only have three good skulls. And this might be one of the best skeletons to tell us why Denver triceratops is smaller than all of their cousins everywhere else." ## Scientists Hope To Also Uncover New Clues The bones found in Thornton also appear to be spread out, Sertich said. So he thinks this triceratops might have died and laid on the ground for a few days or weeks. "The bones fell apart, the flesh fell apart," he said. "Things like T. rex would've come and taken bites out it." That means they could possibly locate T. rex teeth as well. This could unlock new clues about the fearsome carnivores. Once the bones are fully uncovered, they will be wrapped in a cast to prevent them from breaking. When completely dug up, the bones will be sent to the museum. Scientists will clean them, put them together, and display them. ## Workers Knew They Made A Big Find Sertich has praised the construction crew that made the find. Too often, people find bones without realizing how important they are. Workers often just carry on with their jobs. They end up destroying or building on top of history. "They knew what they found the moment they hit it," he said. They stopped what they were doing. They recognized the bones were important. "And they called the right people."