Turkey buffets down coup attempt The giant army tanks began showing up on Istanbul’s Bosphorus Bridge Friday night. The bridge is in Turkey, a country near eastern Europe and the Middle East. At first, few people knew what was happening. Then, shortly before 11 at night, gunfire broke out in Ankara, Turkey's capital city. Soldiers began filling the city’s streets. By then, it was clear someone was trying to overthrow the government. This is called a coup. Turkey's president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, said nothing about what was happening. People began to wonder if he had been captured or whether he was still alive. Turkey has had coups by the army before. Many people in the country are Muslim, or practice the religion of Islam. The military strongly believes the government should not be religious.  Erdogan has put some of his Islamic religion into government, and many Turks are not happy with him. Many also say the president has too much power. They say he punishes those who are against him. Still, many Turks do support him. He was elected by the Turkish people. During the coup, it looked as if Erdogan might have been removed. People began to wonder who was in control of the country. Shortly after 11 p.m., Prime Minister Binyali Yildirim spoke to the Turkish people. He is second in command within the Turkish government. Yildirim announced that a group within the Turkish army was trying to take over the government. The coup was against the wishes of the army's top leaders, he said.  Yildirim declared that Erdogan was still in control.  “The government elected by the people remains in charge,” he said. “This government will only go when the people say so.” Things did not look good for Erdogan, though. It was not known where he was. It appeared he could not even get to a camera to make his own statement. Meanwhile, the forces trying to overthrow Erdogan pushed on. Their military vehicles spread across Ankara and Istanbul. By late Friday evening, Istanbul’s main airport had been taken. At 11:40 pm, news finally came that Erdogan was alive and safe. Still, his government seemed to be losing control.  Then, the coup leaders made a number of mistakes. The biggest mistake was that Erdogan was allowed to escape his hideout. The hideout was bombed but only after he had left. As a result, Erdogan was finally able to get a message to his supporters. He urged them to gather in squares and airports.  “There is no power higher than the power of the people,” he said. Many Turks quickly answered his call. They began pouring into the streets. Thousands marched on Istanbul’s main airport. The battle was still far from over, though. Airplanes fought in the skies and tanks attacked one of the main government buildings. However, most Turks quickly showed their support for Erdogan. Even people who do not like the president spoke out against the coup. Turkey may have problems, but a government takeover is not the answer, they said.  Meanwhile in Istanbul, Erdogan’s supporters took back control of the city's main airport. At 3:20 a.m., Erdogan was finally able to land. A huge crowd of supporters was there to greet him. At 4 a.m., Erdogan made a speech to the nation. Turkey's government and its president were chosen by the Turkish people, he said. The "invaders” who want to take over will not win. At 6:40 a.m., the soldiers who seized Bosphorus Bridge finally surrendered. With that, the coup came to an end. Many wonder what will come next. Some believe Erdogan might become even less democratic and try to take more power. Others think he might change because of the coup and give more power to the people.