If Ben Franklin had had his way, the turkey would be our national symbol, according to some stories of our nation's founding. But then, what would we eat for Thanksgiving? You know that turkey you are going to eat for Thanksgiving dinner? Ben Franklin thought it should have been the nation's symbol. Franklin, one of our Founding Fathers, may have been right about turkeys being better than eagles. The case can be made, with some humor. The turkey is a "much more respectable bird," Franklin wrote. He meant wild turkeys. He didn't mean the ones we find in the grocery store today. The bald eagle is a slob. It fools America by looking like a powerful bird, ready for action. OK, those were not Franklin's exact words. But that was the idea. Evidence is found at one Florida landfill. Eagles there spend time with vultures. Vultures are lazy. They do not hunt. They eat garbage. Turkeys never fight over garbage. Turkeys are fitness nuts. They eat acorns, seeds, mushrooms. Sometimes they eat frog legs. Turkeys have the muscles to get away fast if bothered. They can run at 20 miles per hour and fly at 55 mph. Some people say that a turkey is so stupid it will look up at rain and drown. That is not true. Turkeys have sharp eyes and really good ears. Hunters say turkeys can see them make a small move from a mile away. The birds can tell the direction and distance of sound in heavy woods. It is amazing, scientists say. Some people say that you are what you eat. If that is true, then turkeys taste like nature. If eagles are what they eat at landfills full of garbage, then yuck. Eagles, like vultures, will eat dead animals and plants they find on the ground. Franklin was upset that the symbol of our nation is a thief. It will sit in a tree while another bird works to snatch a fish from the water. Then the eagle will swoop in. It will scare the other bird until it drops the fish, then take off with it. Turkeys also are bullies. But they pick on themselves. They are known to see their reflections on the side of a car and try to fight with what they see. An average male eagle in Florida stands 2 feet, 4 inches. It weighs less than 10 pounds. And it has wings that measure nearly 6 feet from one wing tip to the other. The average turkey stands 3 feet, 4 inches. It weighs 19 pounds and has a wingspan of 4 feet, 6 inches. "They are a beautiful bird," said Roger Shields, a Florida scientist. "When they get the sun on them, I think they are just as pretty as an eagle." Both birds came back from big problems. In the early 1960s there were fewer than 500 pairs of eagles in the 48 mainland states. Chemicals meant to control bugs had killed many eagles. But there are more than 10,000 of them today. The number of turkeys fell to a few hundred thousand in the early 1900s. Forests were being cut down. But now there are more than 6 million. Scientists see big differences when they try to nurse the birds back to health. A wild turkey that's being held so it can be helped will go crazy trying to escape. Sick eagles taken to the Audubon Center for Birds of Prey in Florida seem to think differently. "Wow! Food, nice people, awesome vulture stink," they seem to say. There is one very American thing about eagles at Florida landfills: they like the all-you-can-eat fast food. Workers at a Florida landfill said a single eagle showed up in the early 1980s. The next year there were two. Four came the year after. One person counted 90 within 30 minutes two years ago. Their behavior changed as more eagles showed up. They started eating garbage instead of hunting for rats and other critters. Florida scientist Michelle Vandeventer thinks eagles also come to landfills to make friends. But the birds are definitely smart, Vandeventer said. "Mama eagles don't raise fools."