Turkey buffets down coup attempt Tanks drove onto Istanbul’s Bosphorus Bridge last Friday night. The bridge is in Turkey. The country is on the east side of Europe, near the Middle East. At first, no one knew why soldiers were there. Then, guns started firing in the Turkish city of Ankara. Soldiers began filling the streets. By then it was clear what was happening. A group of soldiers was trying to take over the government. This is called a coup. Coups have happened in Turkey before. The country's military and its government do not always get along. The military in Turkey believes the government should not be religious. Many Turkish people are religious and practice Islam. It is a religion like Christianity or Judaism. People who practice Islam are called Muslims. The president of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, is Muslim. He has added religion into his leadership of Turkey. There are some Turkish people who do not like this. They might dislike Erdogan for other reasons, too. He has too much power, some say. They say he punishes people who are against him. Still, many Turkish people like the president. He was elected by the Turkish people. When the coup happened, people were worried. Erdogan was missing. Shortly after 11 Friday night, the government finally said what was happening. A group within the Turkish army was trying to take power. The army's top leaders and many soldiers still supported Erdogan. The soldiers trying to overthrow Erdogan kept pushing. Their tanks spread across Ankara and Istanbul. By late Friday evening, they had taken over Istanbul’s main airport. At 11:40 p.m., word finally came that Erdogan was safe. Still, Erdogan and his government seemed to be losing power quickly.  Then, the coup leaders made some big mistakes. The biggest was letting Erdogan escape from his hideout. The hideout was bombed but only after he had left. Erdogan finally was able to get a message to his supporters. He asked them to gather in the streets.  “There is no power higher than the power of the people,” he said. Many Turks quickly answered the president's call. They began pouring into the streets to show their support for him. Even people who do not like the president spoke out against the coup. Overthrowing the government is not the answer to Turkey's problems, they said.  Erdogan’s supporters soon took back Istanbul's main airport. He was finally able to come back to Turkey. The next day at 6:40 a.m., the soldiers who seized Bosphorus Bridge put down their guns and surrendered. The coup was over.