Turkey buffets down coup attempt The tanks began appearing on Istanbul’s Bosphorus Bridge Friday night. The bridge is in Turkey, a country near eastern Europe and western Asia. At first, few people understood what was happening. Then, shortly before 11 p.m. there were reports of gunfire in Ankara, the Turkish capital. Soldiers soon began filling the city’s streets. By then it was clear that an attempted coup, or government overthrow, was under way. President Recep Tayyip Erdogan said nothing about what was going on. His silence made it seem as if he might have been seized or killed. Turkey has seen coups staged by the military before. The country is Islamic. Islam is a religion, like Christianity or Judaism, and is practiced by Muslims. Many of Turkey's people are Muslim, including those in government, but the military is nonreligious. This has led to problems between the military and the government in the past. However, most people thought those problems were over.  It is true that many Turks oppose Erdogan's presidency. Many say the president has too much power. In addition, many claim Erdogan's government is too closely tied to the Islamic faith. Under Turkish law, religion and government are supposed to be separate.  Still, much of the population is loyal to Erdogan, and he seemed to have tamed the army. Now, it suddenly looked as if he might have been toppled from power. People began to wonder who was in control of the country. Then came the first great shock of the night. Shortly after 11 p.m., Prime Minister Binyali Yildirim announced that a group within the military had attempted a coup against the wishes of the military's top leaders. Yildirim declared that Erdogan was still in control. “The government elected by the people remains in charge,” he said. “This government will only go when the people say so.” Things did not look good for Erdogan, however. His location was unknown, and it appeared he could not get to a camera to make his own statement. Meanwhile, the forces seeking to overthrow Erdogan continued to extend their control. Their tanks spread across Ankara and Istanbul, and by late Friday evening, Istanbul’s main airport had been taken. At about 11:30 p.m., the coup’s leaders released a statement claiming they had seized power. At 11:40 p.m., news finally came that Erdogan was alive and safe. Still, the president and his government seemed to be losing control. In Ankara, troops raided the offices of the state broadcaster and ordered the newsreader to announce that the military was now in charge.  With Erdogan still not making any announcements, it looked like the end for the president. Then, the coup leaders made a series of missteps. For a start, Erdogan was allowed to escape his hideout, which was bombed but only after he left. As a result, Erdogan was finally able to get a message to his supporters. He urged Turks to gather in public squares and airports. “There is no power higher than the power of the people,” he said. The Turkish people quickly answered his call and began pouring into the streets. Thousands marched on Istanbul’s main airport. The battle was still far from over, though. Airplanes fought in the skies and tanks attacked one of the main government buildings.   However, things quickly began to turn in Erdogan’s favor. Even groups who do not like the president came out against the overthrow. Turkey may have problems, but a coup is not the answer, they said. Meanwhile in Istanbul, Erdogan’s supporters took back control of the city’s main airport, and at 3:20 a.m., the president was finally able to land. A huge crowd of supporters was there to greet him. At 4 a.m., Erdogan made a speech to the nation. “Turkey has a democratically elected government and president,” he said. “We are in charge and we will continue exercising our powers until the end. We will not abandon our country to these invaders.” At 6:40 a.m., the soldiers who had seized Bosphorus Bridge finally surrendered, bringing the attempt at overthrowing the government to an end. Many wonder what will come next. Some think the attempt to overthrow his government could push Erdogan to try and take even more control of Turkey. Others believe the coup might push him to make the government more democratic.