Turkey buffets down coup attempt When soldiers first parked tanks on Istanbul’s Bosphorus Bridge, few people understood what was happening. Most suspected a new terror threat. Then, shortly before 11 p.m. Friday came reports of gunfire in Ankara, the Turkish capital. Soldiers soon began filling the city’s streets, and it became clear that an attempted coup was under way.  The president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, made no statement, and that made it seem that he might have been seized or killed. Turkey has had coups staged by the military before, but most people thought they were a thing of the past.  It is true that many Turks oppose Erdogan's presidency, which opposition parties say has become less and less democratic. In addition, many say they believe Erdogan's government is too closely tied to the Islamic faith. Under Turkish law, religion and government are supposed to be strictly separate. The military in Turkey is not religious. Still, the country has a huge population of Muslims, and Erdogan seemed to have won the loyalty of the Turkish people. He also seemed to have tamed the army. As uncertainty grew Friday night, however, people began to wonder who was in control of the country. Then came the first great shock of the night. Shortly after 11 p.m., the prime minister, Binyali Yildirim, announced that a group within the military had attempted a coup against the wishes of military high command.  Yildirim declared that Erdogan was still in control. “The government elected by the people remains in charge,” he said. “This government will only go when the people say so.” Things did not look good for Erdogan, however. He was missing in action and seemingly could not get to a camera to make his own statement. Meanwhile, rebel tanks spread across Ankara and Istanbul. By late Friday evening, the rebels had secured Istanbul’s main airport. The coup’s leaders then released a statement at about 11:30 p.m. claiming they had seized power to protect democratic order. At 11:40 p.m., Erdogan’s office finally confirmed he was safe — but key allies were not. Reports said rebels had kidnapped the head of Turkey’s military high command. So as Saturday began, the elected government seemed to have lost its control. In Ankara, troops raided the offices of the state broadcaster, TRT. Within minutes, the soldiers had ordered the newsreader to announce that the military was in control of Turkey.  With Erdogan still off the airwaves, it looked like the end for the president. Then, however, the coup leaders made a series of missteps. For a start, Erdogan was allowed to escape his hideout, which was bombed but only after he left. As a result, Erdogan was finally able to broadcast a message to his supporters, and he urged them to gather in public squares and airports. “There is no power higher than the power of the people,” he said. The rallying cry worked. People streamed into the streets, with thousands marching on Istanbul’s main airport. The battle was nevertheless far from over. About 1 a.m., rebel tanks opened fire outside the Parliament in Ankara. Overhead, a dogfight broke out between rival elements of the air force.  However, within an hour, the tide started turning in Erdogan’s favor. Increasing numbers of military high command spoke out on his behalf, and all of the main opposition parties condemned the coup. "Yes, we have problems in Turkey," said Hisyar Özsoy, a member of the opposition HDP Party. "But at the same time no military intervention can be a solution.”  Meanwhile in Istanbul, Erdogan’s supporters seized control of the city’s main airport, finally clearing the way for him to land at 3:20 a.m. He was met by huge crowds of supporters. At 4 a.m., Erdogan made a speech to the nation. “Turkey has a democratically elected government and president,” he said. “We are in charge and we will continue exercising our powers until the end. We will not abandon our country to these invaders.” Dawn brought more good news for the president. At 6:40 a.m., the soldiers who had seized Bosphorus Bridge surrendered. The bridge that symbolized the start of the coup now signaled its end. Shortly after noon, the prime minister declared that 2,839 rebels had been captured and 104 killed. The situation, he said, was completely under control. Now that Erdogan has regained power, many wonder how he will use it. He could crack down harder on his political enemies and push for more control over the government. Erdogan could allow for greater democracy, given that most opposition parties rallied around him during the coup.