The sage of our Founding Fathers considered the turkey a respectable, if not noble, bird. The eagle, to paraphrase this signer of the Declaration of Independence, was a mere thief. You know that turkey you're going to eat for Thanksgiving dinner? Imagine it as the nation's symbol. There's an argument to be dished out, with a side of tongue-in-cheek, that Ben Franklin had it right about turkeys and eagles. The turkey – wild ones, anyway – is a "much more respectable bird," Franklin wrote. The bald eagle, and these aren't his exact words, is a slob that fools America with its piercing eyes. Evidence is at this Florida landfill, where eagles hang with vultures, a bunch of dude-bros with bellies full of garbage. Meanwhile, turkeys that roam landfill woods never join the countless birds that fight over garbage like gnarly chicken bones. Turkeys are fitness nuts, grazing for seeds, acorns, mushrooms and occasional frog legs. They have the ropy muscles to hit the afterburners if bothered, running at 20 miles per hour or flying at 55 mph. If you heard that a turkey is so stupid it will look up at rain and drown, that's fiction. Don't even doubt their laser eyes and excellent hearing. Hunters know if they twitch a muscle, a gobbler will see it from a mile away and then be miles away. Their ability to pinpoint the direction and distance of sound in heavy woods is astounding, say biologists. If you are what you eat, then turkeys taste like nature. A wild turkey has "a lot less fat" than a store-bought roaster, said Tom Hughes of the National Wild Turkey Federation. If eagles are what they wolf down at landfills, like the rotting kielbasa they can spot with their telescopic vision, then yuck. What eagles may do best is make that pretty weird face on the back of a $1 bill. Yes, scavenging – an eagle and vulture specialty – is a virtue, like getting up at dawn on Saturday to be the first to prowl garage sales. But Franklin was bummed that the nation's symbol of patriotism is a thief. It will perch in a tree while an osprey works to snatch a fish from the water and then swoop in, with a big display of land of the free and home of the brave, scaring the osprey until it drops its meal. Full disclosure: Turkeys also bully – themselves. They are known to catch their reflections on the side of a car and have a go at that mirrored bad-boy. A standard male eagle in Florida stands 2 feet, 4 inches, weighs less than 10 pounds and has a wingspan of nearly 6 feet. "What they've evolved to do is a relentless pursuit of survival," said Matt Smith, Audubon Florida EagleWatch coordinator. Typical turkeys stand 3 feet, 4 inches, weigh 19 pounds and have wingspans of 4 feet, 6 inches. "They are a beautiful bird," said Roger Shields, a state biologist. "When they get the sun on them, I think they are just as pretty as an eagle." Both birds made legendary comebacks. Dying from pesticides in the U.S., the number of eagles fell to fewer than 500 breeding pairs by the early 1960s, but there are more than 10,000 of them today. When the nation's forests were mowed down through the early 1900s, turkeys declined to a few hundred thousand, but now number more than 6 million. Biologists nursing them to health found striking differences. A wild turkey captured for medical care or relocation may display a truly wild spirit, nearly killing itself in order to escape. Injured eagles taken to the Audubon Center for Birds of Prey in Florida seem to respond with: "Wow! Food, nice people, awesome vulture stink." If there is something truly American about eagles at Florida landfills, it's the appeal of fast food in abundance. Workers at the landfill said a single eagle showed up in the early '80s. The next year there were two, then four the year after. An engineer counted 90 within 30 minutes two years ago. As numbers rose, their behavior shifted from rodent hunter to garbage specialist. State biologist Michelle Vandeventer suspects eagles are at least partly drawn to landfills for companionship and to lounge around. But the birds are nothing if not cunning, Vandeventer said. "Mama eagles don't raise fools."