It is said that Founding Father Ben Franklin nominated the wild turkey to be the new nation's symbol. But he, and the bird, lost that vote. Maybe it was that soaring thing eagles do ... You know that turkey you're going to eat for Thanksgiving dinner? Ben Franklin thought it should have been the nation's symbol. Turns out Franklin might have been right about turkeys being better than eagles. Swallow it with a little humor. The turkey is a "much more respectable bird," Franklin wrote. He meant wild birds, not the ones in the grocery store today. The bald eagle is a slob. It fools America by looking ready for action. OK, those weren't Franklin's exact words. But that was the idea. Evidence can be found at one Florida landfill. Eagles there hang with vultures, a bunch of slackers with a hunger for garbage. Meanwhile, turkeys never fight over garbage. Turkeys are fitness nuts. They eat seeds, acorns, mushrooms and sometimes frog legs and have the strong muscles to get away fast if bothered. They can run at 20 miles per hour and fly at 55 mph. If you heard that a turkey is so stupid it will look up at rain and drown, that's false. Turkeys have eyes like lasers and really good ears. Hunters know if they move a muscle, a turkey will see it from a mile away. The birds' ability to know the direction and distance of sound in heavy woods is astounding, say scientists. Some people say that you are what you eat. If that's true, then turkeys taste like nature. Wild turkeys have "a lot less fat" than store-bought ones, said Tom Hughes of the National Wild Turkey Federation. If eagles are what they wolf down at landfills, then yuck. What they may do best is make that pretty weird face on the back of a $1 bill. Eagles, like vultures, specialize in picking up scraps of dead animals and plants from the ground. Franklin was said to be upset that the symbol of the nation is a thief. It will wait in a tree while an osprey works to snatch a fish from the water. Then the eagle will swoop in. It will scare the osprey until it drops its meal, then do some fast take-out. Turkeys also are bullies. But they pick on themselves. They are known to catch their reflections on the side of a car and try to fight with what they see. An average male eagle in Florida stands 2 feet, 4 inches. It weighs less than 10 pounds. And it has wings that measure nearly 6 feet from one wing tip to the other. They have developed into an animal that is only trying to get by, said Matt Smith, Audubon Florida EagleWatch coordinator. The average turkey stands 3 feet, 4 inches. It weighs 19 pounds and has a wingspan of 4 feet, 6 inches. "They are a beautiful bird," said Roger Shields, a Florida scientist. "When they get the sun on them, I think they are just as pretty as an eagle." Both birds have made legendary comebacks. The number of eagles fell to fewer than 500 breeding pairs in the mainland U.S. by the early 1960s. Chemicals are used to kill bugs that damage crops. They also killed lots of eagles. But there are more than 10,000 of them today. Turkeys declined to a few hundred thousand as forests were destroyed through the early 1900s. Now there are more than 6 million. Scientists nursing them to health found big differences. A wild turkey captured to be cared for may show a truly wild spirit. The bird will all but kill itself trying to escape. Hurt eagles taken to the Audubon Center for Birds of Prey in Florida seem to say: "Wow! Food, nice people, awesome vulture stink." If there is something truly American about the eagles at Florida landfills, it's that they like all-you-can-eat fast food. Workers at a Florida landfill said a single eagle showed up in the early '80s. The next year there were two, then four the year after that. One person counted 90 within 30 minutes two years ago. As numbers rose, their behavior shifted from hunting rats and mice to eating garbage. Florida scientist Michelle Vandeventer thinks eagles are at least partly drawn to landfills to make friends. But the birds are nothing if not smart, Vandeventer said. "Mama eagles don't raise fools."