Turtles are cool — from their history to their shells to their colors Imagine if you were a turtle. What would you eat? You would hunt for worms, insects, plants or even other turtles' eggs to eat. You would bury yourself in mud or leaf piles for the winter. You would be a reptile, a type of cold-blooded animal that includes snakes and crocodiles. If you were a box turtle, you would be one of the only reptiles who can completely close up in a shell for protection. Turtles have been around for more than 200 million years. Millions of years ago, turtles had teeth. They were much larger than today's turtle. However, their bodies have not changed much. They now have horny ridges in their mouths instead of teeth. They use those ridges, and sharp beaks, to tear food and defend themselves. There are more than 300 kinds of turtles worldwide. Are you interested in learning about these curious creatures? We will give you ideas of where to look and what you are looking at. Turtles cannot leave their shells. The shell of a turtle has two parts. The upper part is called the carapace. It houses the turtle's spine and ribs. The bottom part is called the plastron. It covers the turtle's underside. Both halves have parts called scutes. Scutes protect the bone inside. Scutes are made of keratin, just like your fingernails. The shell grows as the turtle grows. Some turtles shed old scutes. Land turtles usually have rounded shells, which are harder for predators to get their jaws around. Turtles that live in water have shells that are good for swimming. Scutes may be a different pattern, color and size depending on the type and age of the turtle. You might see rings on each scute. Like tree rings, these can help you guess a turtle's age. Many turtles live in freshwater ponds. Still, they lay their eggs on land or climb on logs to rest in the sun. Their feet are webbed. Box turtles are land dwellers and love wooded areas. The northern diamondback terrapin is Maryland's state reptile. Jack Cover works at an aquarium in Baltimore, Maryland. He compared the diamondback's shell to our fingerprints. "No two diamondbacks have exactly the same coloration and spot patterns," Cover said. The northern diamondback lives in Maryland's Chesapeake Bay, where the ocean meets fresh water.  Karyn Molines works for Maryland's parks. She suggests a kayak or canoe trip to spot a diamondback. Molines said you can see "their eyes and noses popping up out of the water." You should think hard before you get a pet turtle. They can live 20 to 80 years or more. Turtles need the temperature to be just right. They also need good lighting, space, food and cleanliness. What would become of your turtle if you got tired of caring for it? It is against the law and cruel to just drop it off in the woods. The Humane Society of America is a group that protects animals. It says turtles are best left in the wild.  Instead of bringing one home, find a spot where you can watch turtles in their home. Take photos. You will learn more about their lives, and they will be much happier. Just because a turtle is out of water, that does not mean it is in trouble. It may be a mother going to or from its nesting spot. Turtles in the road should safely be guided to a space in the direction they were heading. But be careful. Turtles can bite. Snappers in particular have long necks and can whip their heads around quickly if they feel threatened.