Turtles are cool — from their history to their shells to their colors Imagine being a turtle. You would hunt for worms, insects, plants or even other turtles' eggs to eat. You would bury yourself in mud or leaf piles for the winter. If you were a box turtle, you would be among the only reptiles able to completely withdraw into a shell, closing it tightly for protection. Turtles have been around for more than 200 million years. Millions of years ago, turtles had teeth and were much larger than today's species, but their physical structure hasn't changed much. Horny ridges in turtle mouths long ago replaced teeth and, along with sharp beaks, are used to tear food or as tools to defend themselves. There are more than 300 turtle species worldwide. If you're interested in learning about these curious creatures, we'll give you a few ideas of where to look and just what you're looking at. Turtles cannot leave their shells. The top part, or carapace, of these bony protective coverings include the turtle's spine and ribs. The lower part, or plastron, covers the turtle's underside. Both halves have sections called scutes, which are made of keratin, like your fingernails, and protect the bone underneath. The shell grows as the turtle grows. Some turtles shed old scutes. Land turtles tend to have rounded carapaces, which are hard for predators to get their jaws around. Turtles that live in water have swimming-friendly, flatter carapaces. Scutes vary in pattern, color, texture and size depending on the species and age of the turtle. You might notice growth rings on each scute. Like tree rings, these can help you estimate a turtle's age. Jack Cover of Baltimore, Maryland's National Aquarium said, "If the turtle has a good year of abundant food and an extended warm season, the distance between the rings is greater." Many turtles, such as snappers, red-eared sliders and eastern painted turtles, live in freshwater ponds and wetlands but lay their eggs on land or climb on logs to bask in the sun. Their feet are webbed. Box turtles are land dwellers and love wooded areas. The northern diamondback terrapin, Maryland's state reptile and the mascot of the University of Maryland, is found in the Chesapeake Bay's brackish, or slightly salty, waters. "Similar to the uniqueness of our fingerprints, no two diamondbacks have exactly the same coloration and spot patterns," Cover said. Karyn Molines, a spokeswoman for Calvert County, Maryland, parks, suggests a kayak or canoe trip for spotting a diamondback. "You'll often see their eyes and noses popping up out of the water," Molines said. Having a pet turtle means being willing to care for an animal that can live 20 to 80 years or more. Turtles require very specific temperature, lighting, space, food and cleanliness. They can possibly spread the salmonella bacteria to people. What would become of your turtle if you got tired of caring for it? It's against the law and cruel to just drop it off in the woods. The Humane Society of America says turtles are best left in the wild. "To protect your health, the Earth and the animals, please don't get a turtle for a pet!" the organization urges on its website. Instead of bringing one home, find a spot where you can watch turtles in their natural environment. Take photos. You'll learn more about their lives, and they'll be much happier. Just because a turtle is out of water, doesn't mean it's in trouble. It may be a female going to or from its nesting site. Turtles in the road should safely be guided to a space in the direction they were heading. But be careful: Turtles can bite. Snappers in particular have long necks and can whip their heads around quickly if they feel threatened.