Sea turtles lay their eggs on the beach. For years their numbers were down in Florida. Now, they are back up. Scientists want to know why. Tracking young sea turtles is one way to learn. Many more sea turtles have nested on Florida beaches in the past five years. They come to bury their eggs in the sand. However, scientists don't know exactly why they are coming back. Welcome to the strange world of sea turtles. They spend much of their life facing dangers like fishing boats and oil spills. Loggerhead, green and leatherback are different kinds of sea turtles. Each builds nests along the Florida coast. The number of eggs they lay goes up and down each year. For example, green turtles have been coming to Florida's beaches more and more. Scientists were surprised by last year's high numbers of eggs. This year’s count is lower. But experts knew that would happen. The number of nests they make always seem to go up and down every other year. Llewellyn Ehrhart is a professor. He thinks the reason might have to do with the food the turtles have available to eat. However, nothing else in ocean studies goes, “high, low, high, low, year in and year out,” he said. The kings of Florida’s coast are loggerhead turtles. They are called loggerheads because their heads are big. Their shells measure 3 1/2 feet. Female loggerheads laid eggs in 46,885 nests this year. Scientists counted the eggs at nesting spots on 26 beaches. “Every year, it’s always a little bit of a surprise for what we get,” said Anne Meylan, a scientist. Loggerheads are not simple to study, she said. They live a long time. There have been more loggerhead turtles on Florida beaches since 2010. In 1998, there were 59,918 turtles. By 2007, their numbers went down to 28,074. They went back up to 58,172 in 2012. And now they're at 46,885 nests this year. “We don’t know why they went down. And we don’t know why they are coming back,” Meylan said. More and more turtles were being killed in the early 2000s. Some scientists blamed the deaths on large fishing companies. By the late 2000s, though, fishing companies found ways to catch fish without killing so many turtles. Some other scientists don't believe that big fishing companies were the main cause for turtle deaths. All the scientists do agree on one thing. Higher loggerhead deaths were caused by problems far away from Florida. A scientist named Kate Mansfield wants to know what those problems are. She attaches tiny trackers to young loggerhead turtles to find out. Mansfield said that she was looking into the early years of a sea turtle's life. “There is very little known about what they do,” she said. She thinks their actions out in the ocean may help scientists learn about their nesting habits. The state of Florida and the U.S. government have programs to protect the sea turtles. Experts say the programs have made a difference. For example, green turtles were about to disappear from Florida in the 1970s. Now, the turtles live longer because of these programs. In 1978, restaurants had to stop serving green-turtle steaks and green-turtle soup, Ehrhart said. "Most people stopped killing them, and guess what, they came back,” he added. Laws passed to protect turtles and their nests have also brought changes. People who live along the seashore have become better about dimming their lights. Green turtles are scared by bright lights. Green turtles are now coming back. The story with leatherback turtles is even less clear. Their numbers are going down along the shore of the Pacific Ocean. But on Atlantic Ocean beaches, like Florida, they are going up, Ehrhart said. “I don’t think anybody knows the reason for this,” he said. The turtles hatch from their eggs and then come back as 800- or 900-pound adults to lay more eggs. Between those times are no records of them showing up anywhere. “It’s a real head-scratcher where leatherbacks are spending their growing-up years," he said.