Turtles are cool — from their history to their shells to their colors Imagine being a turtle. You would hunt for worms, insects, plants or even other turtles' eggs to eat. You would bury yourself in mud or leaf piles for the winter. You would be a reptile, a type of cold-blooded animal that also includes snakes and crocodiles. If you were a box turtle, you would be one of the only reptiles who can completely withdraw into a shell and close it tightly for protection. Turtles have been around for more than 200 million years. Millions of years ago, turtles had teeth and were much larger than today's turtles. However, their body hasn't changed that much. Long ago, horny ridges in turtle mouths replaced teeth. They use those ridges, and sharp beaks, to tear food and defend themselves. There are more than 300 kinds of turtles worldwide. Interested in learning about these curious creatures? We'll give you a few ideas of where to look and what you're looking at. Turtles cannot leave their shells. The shell of a turtle has two parts. The upper part is called the carapace and houses the turtle's spine and ribs. The bottom part is called the plastron and covers the turtle's underside. Both halves have parts called scutes, which protect the bone beneath. Scutes are made of keratin, just like your fingernails. The shell grows as the turtle grows. Some turtles shed old scutes. Land turtles tend to have rounded shells, which are hard for predators to get their jaws around. Turtles that live in water have swimming-friendly shells. Scutes may be a different pattern, color and size depending on the type and age of the turtle. You might notice growth rings on each scute. Like tree rings, these can help you guess a turtle's age. Jack Cover works at Baltimore, Maryland's National Aquarium. He said, the distance between the rings is greater during years that the turtle is well-fed and the warm season lasts longer.  Many turtles, such as snappers, red-eared sliders and eastern painted turtles, live in freshwater ponds and wetlands. Still, they lay their eggs on land or climb on logs to rest in the sun. Their feet are webbed. Box turtles live on land and love wooded areas. The northern diamondback terrapin is Maryland's state reptile and the mascot of the University of Maryland. It's found in the Chesapeake Bay's brackish, or slightly salty, waters. Cover compared the diamondback's shell to our fingerprints. "No two diamondbacks have exactly the same coloration and spot patterns," he said. Karyn Molines works for the parks in Chesapeake Bay, Maryland. She suggests a kayak or canoe trip to spot a diamondback. "You'll often see their eyes and noses popping up out of the water," Molines said. Having a pet turtle means caring for an animal that can live 20 to 80 years or more. Turtles need particular temperatures, lighting, space, food and cleanliness. They can possibly give the salmonella bacteria to people. What would become of your turtle if you got tired of caring for it? It's against the law and cruel to just drop it off in the woods. The Humane Society of America is a group that works to protect animals. It says turtles are best left in the wild. "To protect your health, the Earth and the animals, please don't get a turtle for a pet!" the group says on its website. Instead of bringing one home, find a spot where you can watch turtles in their natural home. Take photos. You'll learn more about their lives, and they'll be much happier. Just because a turtle is out of water, doesn't mean it's in trouble. It may be a female going to or from its nesting spot. Turtles in the road should safely be guided to a space in the direction they were heading. But be careful: Turtles can bite. Snappers in particular have long necks and can whip their heads around quickly if they feel threatened.