The scientists want to know there are so many sea turtles going to the beaches in Florida. Sea turtles build nests on beaches in Florida. This year, there are lots of sea turtles. But scientists do not know why. There are different kinds of sea turtles. There are loggerhead, green and leatherback turtles. More and more green turtles come to Florida. Scientists were surprised about how many nests they built last year. This year, there are not as many nests. More nests means more turtles. Llewellyn Ehrhart studies turtles. He thinks there are more turtles when there is more food. The biggest turtles in Florida are loggerheads. Their name comes from their big heads. There have been more loggerhead turtles in Florida since 2010. In 1998, there were 59,918 nests. In 2007, there were 28,074 nests. In 2012, there were 58,172 nests. This year, there are 46,885 nests. Anne Meylan is a scientist. “We do not know why the numbers went down. And we do not know why they are coming back,” she said. In the early 2000s, many turtles were being killed. Some scientists blamed fishing companies. These companies killed turtles while catching fish. Over time, these companies found ways to stop killing turtles. Many loggerheads died because of other problems. But these problems were not in Florida. Kate Mansfield wants to know what those problems are. She is a scientist. She attaches trackers to young loggerhead turtles. She wants to see what the turtles do. “There is very little known about what they do,” she said. Florida and the U.S. government try to protect sea turtles. This makes a difference. In the 1970s, there were not many green turtles left. People killed them and ate them. In 1978, restaurants had to stop serving green turtles. “People stopped killing them. And guess what, they came back,” Llewellyn said. There are also laws that protect turtles. People who live on the beach have to turn down their lights. Bright lights scare green turtles. The story with leatherback turtles is less clear. There are more leatherback turtles on Atlantic Ocean beaches. But there are not as many on Pacific Ocean beaches. “I do not think anybody knows the reason for this,” Llewellyn said. The turtles hatch from their eggs. Then they come back as adults to lay more eggs. No one knows where they go in between.