The federal and state governments have taken steps to protect sea turtles. Restaurants have removed turtle meat from the menu. But scientists still don't fully understand the rebound. More sea turtles are coming ashore to nest on Florida beaches, and the numbers are making scientists hopeful. But many things about these numbers are mysterious. Welcome to the mysterious world of sea turtles. They spend much of their life far from Florida's beaches facing fishing boats, oil spills, plastic trash and many other perils. Different types of turtles like the loggerhead, green and leatherback nest along the state's coast. For almost five years, the numbers of nests scientists counted has risen in general. Yet from year to year their numbers sometimes go down or shoot up and these changes have made scientists pay attention. Green turtles, for example, have wowed scientists with their increased liking for Florida beaches. Last year’s nest count was surprisingly high, but this year’s is lower, a change which experts expected. They knew that green turtles go about nesting in a peculiar way, so the number of nests are expected to go up and down every other year. Llewellyn Ehrhart is a professor at the University of Central Florida (UCF), and an expert on turtles. The yo-yo pattern of nest counts was a great puzzle in sea-turtle biology, he said. The reason seems to have something to do with quantity and quality of food available to them. However, there is nothing else in the entire study of the ocean that goes through this regular pattern of “high, low, high, low, year in and year out,” he said. The turtle kings of Florida’s coast are the loggerheads. They have huge heads poking out of their 3 1/2-foot shells. Female loggerheads laid eggs in 46,885 nests this year. The number came from the state’s count at nesting locations at 26 beaches done over 109 days. The counts from the period may be smaller than yearly totals, but it helps scientists to notice patterns. “Every year, it’s always a little bit of a surprise for what we get,” said Anne Meylan, a scientist at the Fish and Wildlife Research Institute. “The biology of the animals is really complicated. They live a long time, and they are affected by things far away.” Since 2010, loggerhead nest counts at the sites have improved. The count in 1998 of 59,918 dropped down to 28,074 nests by 2007. By 2012, the nest count was back up to 58,172. “We don’t know why they went down, and we don’t know why they are coming back,” Meylan said. “That makes us a little bit more cautious.” Sea turtles were killed in greater numbers through the early 2000s and scientists want to discover if large-scale fishing was the reason. By the late 2000s, large fishing companies took up measures to reduce turtle deaths. Many scientists doubt the evidence supports the large-scale fishing theory. They all agree, though, that the spike in loggerhead deaths was caused by problems or threats far from Florida. Just what those threats are is what UCF scientist Kate Mansfield is trying to figure out by attaching tiny trackers to young loggerheads. Mansfield said that she was especially interested in the early years of their growth. “There is very little known about what they do," she said. She thinks the way they behave in the ocean may have some part in their nesting numbers. Everyone agrees that Florida and government rules for protecting the sea turtles have made a difference, especially in the numbers of green turtles. They were about to disappear from Florida in the 1970s, but now live longer because of these programs. Ehrhart noted that in 1978, restaurants had to get the green-turtle steaks out of their freezers and green-turtle soup stopped showing up on menus. "Most people stopped killing them, and guess what, they came back,” he said. Laws protecting turtles and their nests have caused other changes. More and more communities have better attitudes about dimming their seashore lights. Green turtles especially are scared by man-made lights, scientists say. Mansfield said green turtles may have once had a large presence on Florida shores, and they are now coming back. The story with leatherbacks is even less clear. Their numbers are going down along Pacific Ocean beaches, but rising on Atlantic Ocean beaches, Ehrhart said. “That has sort of spilled over to Florida,” he said. “I don’t think anybody knows the reason for this. Between the time they hit the water as hatchlings and the time they come back 800- or 900-pound adults, there are hardly any records of them appearing anywhere.” He added, “It’s a real head-scratcher where leatherbacks are spending their growing-up years.”