A loggerhead sea turtle swims thousands of miles from the beach where it was hatched. After a few years, it sets out to find that beach again. Scientists may have figured out how they do it. LOS ANGELES — Every two or three years, female sea turtles swim back to the beach where they were born. They return to lay eggs. They dig their nests along the same beach where they once crawled out of their own eggs. One thing has puzzled scientists for years: How do sea turtles find the same place where they were hatched? After all, sea turtles travel across thousands of miles of open ocean every year. How are they able to get back home? Since the 1990s, scientists have known that returning sea turtles are somehow guided by a mysterious force: the Earth’s geomagnetic field. Geomagnetism is an invisible but very strong force. It happens because the center of the Earth consists mostly of iron. The huge chunk of iron at the Earth's center creates a magnetic field. It is as if there is a giant magnet inside the Earth. One end of this magnet is up in the Arctic. It is known as the North Pole. Travelers rely on geomagnetism when they use a compass to find the direction north. The metal needle of a compass is attracted to the North Pole of the Earth, just as a hairpin is attracted to an ordinary magnet. Scientists knew that sea turtles sensed geomagnetism and used it to guide themselves. What they did not know was how they find the same beach where they were born. To find out, scientists conducted a study to track loggerhead sea turtles that lay their eggs on the Florida coast. The study also looks at changes in the Earth’s magnetic field. It shows that these changes affect where turtle eggs are laid. Some things are more magnetic than others. The particular way each thing reacts to geomagnetism is known as its magnetic signature. Imagine that you are pointing a magnet at two objects. One is pulled toward the magnet, while the other is not. That is because each object has a different magnetic signature. An object's magnetic signature does not always stay the same, however. It changes when the magnetic field changes in strength and direction. The new study shows that turtles are not just using geomagnetism to go north, south, east and west. They also know the magnetic signature of their birth beach. It is in their memories. The magnetic signature of beaches changes, however, when the magnetic field changes in strength or direction. They scientists believed that when the beach changes in magnetism, turtles lay their eggs in different spots. In fact, that is exactly what they found. The team looked at 19 years' worth of records. One set of records tracked loggerhead turtle nesting spots along Florida's coast. The other tracked shifts in the geomagnetic field over the same time. They found a link. The turtles changed where they swam as the geomagnetic field shifted. There are still many questions to be answered. For example, scientists do not know how the turtles sense the geomagnetic field, which cannot be seen or heard. The turtles may have something magnetic "in their brains or in their bodies," scientist J. Roger Brothers said. Whatever it is, it acts like a compass. Turtles do not only rely on geomagnetic fields. Other things shape their choice when looking for a place to lay their eggs. Turtles will not lay their eggs in their old nesting spot if it has gotten crowded, Brothers said. "They will usually decide to go nest somewhere else.”