Their numbers were going down in Florida. But now more sea turtles are nesting there. Scientists aren't sure why. Government protections helped. Restaurants took them off the menu. This year the number of sea turtles nesting on Florida beaches is making scientists hopeful. There are, however, many things they don't understand about the numbers of turtles laying eggs in the sand. Welcome to the mysterious world of sea turtles. They spend much of their life facing fishing boats, oil spills, plastic trash and many other dangers. Loggerhead, green and leatherback are three types of turtles that nest along the state's coast. Over the past five years, their numbers have generally gone up — but from year to year they have shot up and gone down. Green turtles, for example, seem to like Florida beaches and this has excited scientists who study them. Last year’s high number of nests surprised scientists when they counted them, but this year’s count is lower. Experts expected the drop because they're aware of the peculiar way they nest. Their nest counts are expected to go up and down every other year, like a yo-yo. Llewellyn Ehrhart, a professor at the University of Central Florida (UCF), has developed new ways to study turtles. The different nest counts were puzzling, he said. The reason seems to have something to do with quantity and quality of food the turtles eat. However, there was nothing else in ocean studies that went, “high, low, high, low, year in and year out,” he said. Loggerhead turtles are the kings of Florida’s coast. They are called loggerheads because their heads are huge. They have 3 1/2-foot shells. Female loggerheads laid eggs in 46,885 nests this year. Scientists counted each of those nests at spots on 26 beaches. “Every year, it’s always a little bit of a surprise for what we get,” said Anne Meylan, a scientist. She felt that it was not simple to study these animals. “They live a long time, and they are affected by things far away,” she said. Since 2010, loggerhead nest counts have improved. The count in 1998 of 59,918 went down to 28,074 nests by 2007. By 2012, the nest count was back up to 58,172. “We don’t know why they went down, and we don’t know why they are coming back,” Meylan said. “That makes us a little bit more cautious.” Scientists want to discover whether large-scale fishing killed large numbers of sea turtles through the early 2000s. By the late 2000s, large fishing companies took measures to lower turtle deaths. Many scientists believe there is not enough proof to support the theory that fishing was the reason for the number of turtle deaths. They all agree though that the spike in loggerhead deaths was caused by problems far from Florida. Just what those problems are is what UCF scientist Kate Mansfield is trying to figure out. She attaches tiny trackers to young loggerhead turtles. Mansfield said that she was especially looking into the early years of their growth. “There is very little known about what they do,” she said. She thinks the way they behave in the ocean may play a part in their nesting numbers. The state of Florida and the U.S. government have programs to protect the sea turtles. Experts agree that the programs have made a difference, especially in the numbers of green turtles. They were about to disappear from Florida in the 1970s but now live longer because of these programs. Professor Ehrhart noted that in 1978, restaurants had to get green-turtle steaks out of their freezers and green-turtle soup stopped showing up on menus. "Most people stopped killing them, and guess what, they came back,” he said. Laws protecting turtles and their nests have caused communities to become better about dimming the lights along the seashore. Green turtles especially are scared by bright lights. Mansfield said green turtles may have once lived in large numbers on Florida shores. They are now coming back. The story with leatherbacks is even less clear. Their numbers are going down along Pacific Ocean beaches, but rising on Atlantic Ocean shores like Florida, Ehrhart said. “I don’t think anybody knows the reason for this," he said. "Between the time they hit the water as hatchlings and the time they come back 800- or 900-pound adults, there are hardly any records of them appearing anywhere.” He added, “It’s a real head-scratcher where leatherbacks are spending their growing-up years.”