Scientists have long wondered how sea turtles can be out in the middle of the ocean, but when it comes time to lay eggs, find their way back to the same beach where they were hatched. LOS ANGELES — It is a mystery that has stumped scientists for years: How do female sea turtles navigate back to the beach where they were born when it comes time to lay their own eggs? After all, sea turtles travel across thousands of miles of open ocean each year. Yet somehow the females find their way back to the spot where they were hatched. Keep in mind that there are no visual guideposts in the open ocean where sea turtles spend most of their lives. Yet every two to three years, sea turtles dig their nests at the same location where they once crawled out of their own eggs. Since the 1990s, scientists have known that the turtles are somehow guided by the Earth’s geomagnetic field. Geomagnetism is an invisible but powerful force. The Earth's core is mostly solid iron. Electrical currents stream from it, creating a strong magnetic field. The force acts like an enormous magnet buried in the planet's center. One end of the magnet, or pole — the North Pole — is in the Arctic. The other end — the South Pole — is in Antarctica. When travelers use a compass to find north, they rely on geomagnetism. The metal needle of a compass is attracted to the North Pole of the Earth, just as a pin is attracted to an ordinary magnet. Scientists knew that sea turtles use magnetism to guide themselves in general directions. What they did not know was how turtles find the exact beach where they were born. A study published on Thursday looks at loggerhead sea turtles that bury their eggs on the Florida coast. It shows that slight changes in the Earth’s magnetic field affect where the eggs are buried. Once again, to understand how geomagnetism works, it helps to imagine that there is a giant bar magnet inside the Earth. Its two ends give off a powerful magnetic charge, which travels in a straight line through the Earth and up into the atmosphere. Because the bar shifts constantly, its angle relative to the Earth changes over time. Also important to understand is that some objects are more magnetic than others. Everything on Earth reacts to geomagnetism in a different way, and the particular way each thing reacts is known as its magnetic signature. Imagine that you are pointing a magnet at two objects, and that one is pulled quickly toward the magnet, while the other is not. The difference in how they are attracted to the magnet is part of their magnetic signature. However, an object's magnetic signature changes when the magnetic field shifts in strength and direction. The signature reflects how an object reacts to magnetism at a given time. Scientist J. Roger Brothers was involved in the new sea turtle study. He said that over thousands of years, turtles developed a way to use the shifts in the geomagnetic field and the field's strength to guide themselves. It is almost as if they have a built-in GPS system similar to what is found in cellphones or cars. Returning turtles are not just using geomagnetism to point themselves in the right general direction, however. Somehow, the turtles are also able to sense, remember and track their birth beach's magnetic signature. But the magnetic signature of a particular stretch of beach changes over time. The change comes in response to changes in the strength and direction of the magnetic field itself. The scientists suspected that shifts in the geomagnetic field led to shifts in loggerhead turtle nesting sites. In fact, that is exactly what they found. The team looked at 19 years' worth of records tracking loggerhead turtle nesting sites along Florida's Atlantic coast. They compared that information to the record of shifts in the geomagnetic field over the same period of time. As the geomagnetic field shifted, the turtles went to different nesting sites. It proved that sea turtles can sense magnetic signatures. However, there are still many more questions to be answered. For example, researchers do not know how the turtles sense the geomagnetic field, which can neither be seen nor heard. “Most likely they have tiny magnetic particles in their brains or in their bodies that act like a compass," Brothers said. The particles may be spread throughout the animals' bodies, which would make them hard to find. Brothers also noted that loggerhead turtles do not only rely on geomagnetic fields when looking for a place to lay their eggs. “We don’t expect that these turtles are coming to the magnetic signature regardless of what else is going on,” he said. “If a condo is built there, they will usually decide to go nest somewhere else.”