There's no place like home as far as loggerhead sea turtles are concerned. When it comes time to lay eggs, the female turtles swim thousands of miles to return to their nesting beach. LOS ANGELES — It is a mystery that has stumped scientists for decades: How do female sea turtles manage to navigate back to the same beach where they were hatched when it comes time to lay their own eggs? After all, sea turtles travel across thousands of miles of open ocean each year — yet the females somehow find their way back to where they were born. Keep in mind that there are no visual guideposts in the open ocean where sea turtles spend most of their lives. It is vast and featureless — and yet every two to three years, sea turtles dig their nests at the same location where they once crawled out of their own eggs. Since the 1990s, scientists have suspected that returning sea turtles are somehow guided by information supplied by the Earth’s geomagnetic field. Geomagnetism is an invisible but powerful force. Electrical currents streaming from the Earth's core, which is mostly iron, create a strong magnetic field. This force acts like an enormous bar magnet buried in the planet's center. One pole — the North Pole — is in the Arctic, while the other — the South Pole — is in Antarctica. When sailors and other travelers use a compass to find north, they rely on geomagnetism. A compass' metal needle is attracted to the North Pole of the Earth's mega-magnet, just as a hairpin is attracted to an ordinary magnet. Scientists knew that turtles use geomagnetism to guide themselves in a general direction, but they did not know how they found the exact beach where they were born. A study published on Thursday looks at loggerhead sea turtles that bury their eggs on the Florida coast. It shows that slight changes in the Earth’s magnetic field affect where turtles travel and where they bury their eggs. Once again, to understand how geomagnetism works, it helps to imagine that there is a giant bar magnet inside the Earth. The bar lines up almost vertically at the center of the Earth, but is skewed slightly. Because the bar continuously shifts a bit, its angle relative to the Earth changes over time. The changing angles are known as inclination angles. Also important to understand is something known as a magnetic signature. Everything on Earth reacts to geomagnetism in a different way, and the precise way each thing reacts is known as its magnetic signature. Imagine that you are pointing a magnet at two objects, and that one is pulled quickly toward the magnet, while the other is not. The difference in the degree to which they are attracted to the magnet is part of their magnetic signature. Magnetic signatures are not fixed, however, but change when the magnetic field changes in strength and direction. Scientist J. Roger Brothers was involved in the new sea turtle study. “Turtles have evolved a way to use the inclination angle of the geomagnetic field" and the field's strength to guide themselves, he said. It is almost as if they have "an internal GPS” system similar to what is found in cellphones. Turtles do not use geomagnetism to just point themselves in the right general direction, but somehow are able to detect, remember and track their birth beach's magnetic signature. Because the geomagnetic field is always shifting, the magnetic signature of a particular stretch of beach also changes over time. The scientists suspected that shifts in magnetic signature would be reflected in shifts in where sea turtles laid their eggs. To test this idea, the researchers looked at 19 years of data on loggerhead nesting sites along the Atlantic coast of Florida. They compared the data to the record of shifts in the geomagnetic field over the same period of time, hoping to find a connection. Magnetic fields move in lines, almost like the lines on a raised map that show hills and mountains. Scientists knew that when magnetic field lines grow stronger, the magnetic signatures of beaches next to each tend to move closer together, like when a scattered group of nails near a magnet all point toward it. They theorized that in years when the magnetic signatures of adjacent beaches moved close to each other, or converged, there should be more nests clustered together on the same stretch of coast. In years when the magnetic signatures spread away from each other, or diverged, the nests should be more spread out. In fact, that is exactly what they found. At times and places where the magnetic signatures of adjacent beaches converged, scientists found an increase in the number of nests in the same general area. At times when the signatures diverged, nests were not as close to one another. However, there are still many more questions to be answered. For example, researchers do not know what the turtles are using to detect the geomagnetic field, which can neither be seen nor heard. “Most likely they have tiny magnetic particles in their brains or in their bodies that act like a compass," Brothers said. The particles may be scattered throughout the animals' bodies, which would make them hard to find. Brothers also noted that while loggerhead turtles may use geomagnetic fields to help them get back home to lay their eggs, it does not appear they rely on the information alone. “We don’t expect that these turtles are coming to the magnetic signature regardless of what else is going on,” he said. “If a condo is built there, they will usually decide to go nest somewhere else.”