Earth is becoming a less diverse planet. WASHINGTON, D.C. — Scientists who met last week in Medellín, Colombia have released a series of reports.  The reports provide the most complete and local look at biodiversity. Biodiversity is the variety of living things in a given environment, whether that's a forest, a stream or an ocean. The new reports looked at entire regions of the world. ## IPBES The Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) measures biodiversity around the world. IPBES is run by the United Nations, a group made up of representatives from almost every country. The United Nations helps countries work together. They work on everything from ending wars to protecting the environment. Any country that belongs to the United Nations can also join IPBES. Hundreds of scientists from around the world contributed to these new reports. The reports were approved by the 129 countries that are members to IPBES. The meeting in Colombia took place from Saturday, March 17, 2018, to Saturday, March 24, 2018\. The reports were released during the meeting. They look at how well animals and plants are doing in the Americas, Europe, Central Asia, Africa and the Asia-Pacific area. The scientists' conclusion after three years of study was that nowhere is doing well. ## Keeping Earth Livable Robert Watson was in charge of the studies. He said they were about more than just critters. Measuring biodiversity is about keeping Earth livable for humans. Humans rely on biodiversity for food, clean water and public health—the general well-being of citizens. In other words, he said, humans are threatened, too, when the natural world is unhealthy. Last week, the last male northern white rhino in Africa died. This is just one example of a popular endangered species nearly going extinct. Lesser-known creatures are struggling as well. Watson said we are now seeing the side effects of the world getting wealthier and more crowded with people. Humans need more of everything: food, clean water, energy and land. The way society has tried to provide for the growing population has hurt the planet's biodiversity, he said. ## Crucial Habitats Falling Victim All at once, crucial habitats are falling victim to many factors. Non-native species have invaded places. Chemicals have hurt plants and animals. Meanwhile, wetlands and mangroves that clean up pollution are disappearing, and the world's waters are suffering from too much fishing, he said. Climate change is also getting worse. Humans burn fossil fuels to heat their homes and power their cars. Burning fossil fuels creates greenhouse gases, which trap heat in the air. This causes it to get hotter, which is called climate change, or global warming. Global warming will soon hurt biodiversity as much as all the other problems combined, Watson said. Jake Rice is Canada's chief government scientist for fisheries and oceans. He sees our actions now affecting the next generation. "We keep making choices to borrow from the future to live well today," he said.  Below are some facts from the regional findings.  ## "Decreasing Strongly" If current patterns continue, the Americas will have 15 percent fewer plants and animals by the year 2050. Nearly a quarter of the species that were fully measured in the study are now threatened, Rice said. A threatened species is one that is losing population. The next step is endangered, when there are dangerously few animals remaining. Species that are endangered risk becoming extinct, or dying off completely.  Overall, more than half of all species are declining. More than 20 percent are "decreasing strongly," Rice said. ## Asia Report Sonali Seneratna Sellamuttu was in charge of the report for Asia. She said "all major ecosystems are threatened in the region." If trends continue, she said, there will be no fish left for large fishing businesses by 2048\. Around that same time, the region will lose 45 percent of its biodiversity. It will also lose about 90 percent of its key corals. Corals are important because they protect shoreline communities from waves and storms. They also provide homes for many sea creatures. ## Europe Doing Better Than Other Regions Watson said this region may be doing the best. Still, 28 percent of the species that only live in Europe are now threatened. In the last decade, almost half of the land-based plant and animal species have declined. Wetlands have also been cut in half since 1970. ## Societies Need To Change Their Ways Africa could lose half of some bird and mammal species by 2100\. Maintaining biodiversity is very important for the continent of Africa. More than 60 percent of the continent's people depend on natural resources for their livelihoods. Already more than 20 percent of Africa's species are threatened, endangered or extinct. Scientists say governments and societies need to change their ways. Individuals can also make changes to help the situation. They can use less energy, less water and eat less red meat, Watson said. The production of red meat causes high emissions of greenhouse gases and is a major cause of deforestation, the cutting down of forests.  The outlook is dark if society doesn't change, but it still can, he said.