Earth is becoming a less diverse planet. WASHINGTON, D.C.  — Four new reports show that Earth is losing plants, animals and clean water at a dramatic rate.  The reports provide the most complete look at the state of biodiversity, which is the variety of living things in a given environment, whether that's a forest, a stream or an ocean. In this case, the reports looked at entire regions of the world. The Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) assesses the state of biodiversity around the world. IPBES is run by the United Nations, a group made up of representatives from almost every country. The United Nations helps countries work together on everything from ending wars to protecting the environment. Any country that belongs to the United Nations can also join IPBES. ## Member Countries Contribute To Reports Hundreds of scientists from around the world contributed to these new reports. The reports were approved by the 129 countries that are members to IPBES. The scientists met in Medellín, Colombia, from Saturday, March 17, 2018, to Saturday, March 24, 2018, where their reports were issued. The reports look at how well animals and plants are doing in the Americas, Europe, Central Asia, Africa and the Asia-Pacific area. Their conclusion after three years of study was that most places are not doing well when it comes to biodiversity.  Robert Watson, a prominent scientist, is the IPBES chairman. He said the study was about more than just critters. It is about keeping Earth livable for humans, considering we rely on biodiversity for food, clean water and public health. "This is undermining well-being across the planet, threatening us long-term on food and water," Watson said in an interview. ## Severe Declines Scientists pointed to last week's death of the last male northern white rhino in Africa as one example of a species being on the brink of extinction. There have also been severe declines in other high-profile animals, like elephants, tigers and pangolins, which look sort of like a scaly anteater. Scientists said lesser-known creatures are struggling as well. The loss of biodiversity around the world is a side effect of the world getting wealthier and more crowded with people, Watson said. Humans need more food, more clean water, more energy and more land to sustain the ever-growing population. Trying to make room for a growing population has affected biodiversity, Watson said.  All at once, crucial habitats are being affected by a number of factors. Non-native species have invaded many ecosystems. Chemicals have hurt plants and animals. Meanwhile, wetlands and mangroves that clean up pollution are disappearing and the world's waters are overfished, he said. ## Borrowing From The Future Moreover, climate change is getting worse. Pollutants such as greenhouse gas emissions continue to accumulate in the atmosphere and contribute to global warming. Global warming will soon hurt biodiversity as much as all the other problems combined, Watson said. Jake Rice, Canada's chief government scientist for fisheries and oceans, was in charge of the Americas report. He thinks our actions now will affect the next generation. "We keep making choices to borrow from the future to live well today," he said.  Duke University conservationist Stuart Pimm, who wasn't part of the study team, said the reports make sense and are based on well-established scientific data: "Are things pretty dire? Yes." Below are some facts from the regional reports.  ## The Americas If current trends continue, by the year 2050, the Americas will have 15 percent fewer plants and animals than today. That means there will be 40 percent fewer plants and animals in the Americas than in the early 1700s. Nearly a quarter of the species that were fully measured in the study are now threatened, Rice said. A threatened species is one that is losing population and is at risk of becoming endangered. Endangered animals are those at risk of becoming extinct, or dying out completely.  Overall, nearly two-thirds of all species are declining and more than one-fifth are "decreasing strongly," Rice said. ## All Major Ecosystems Threatened Sonali Seneratna Sellamuttu was in charge of the Asia report. She said "all major ecosystems are threatened in the region." If trends continue, she said, there will be no fish left for large fishing businesses by 2048\. Around that same time, the region will lose 45 percent of its biodiversity. Asia will also lose about 90 percent of its key coral species. Corals are important because they protect shoreline communities from waves and storms and provide habitat for many sea creatures. ## Europe Doing The Best This is the region that Watson said may be doing the best, and still, 28 percent of the species that only live in Europe are now threatened. In the last decade, 42 percent of the land-based plant and animal species have declined. Wetlands have also been cut in half since 1970, according to Mark Rounsevell, who helped oversee the Europe report.  ## Africa Africa could lose half of some bird and mammal species by 2100\. More than 60 percent of the continent's people depend on natural resources for their livelihoods, said report co-chair Luthando Dziba of South African National Parks. That makes maintaining biodiversity especially important for the continent.  Already, more than 20 percent of Africa's species are threatened, endangered or extinct. While scientists said governments and societies need to change their ways, individuals can also help. People can use less energy, less water and eat less red meat, Watson said. The production of red meat is a major factor in global greenhouse gas emissions, which is causing climate change.  Watson says that although the reports are troubling, there is still time to make a difference.