Earth is becoming a less diverse planet. WASHINGTON, D.C. — The United Nations just came out with new reports. The reports are on Earth's biodiversity.  The United Nations is made up of countries around the world that work together on many different things. Biodiversity is one of them. Biodiversity is the variety of living things in an environment. An environment can be big or small. Forests, oceans and deserts are examples. The reports looked at how well animals and plants are doing in four regions of the world. Those regions are the Americas, Europe, Africa and Asia. The findings are troubling. Earth is losing a lot of plants, animals and clean water.  ## General Well-Being Of Citizens Robert Watson was in charge of the reports. He said it was about more than just animals. It is about keeping Earth livable for humans. Humans depend on biodiversity for food, clean water and public health. Public health is the general well-being of citizens.  Watson said the world is losing biodiversity. This is the effect of large changes in the world. The world is getting wealthier and more crowded with people. Humans need more of everything: food, clean water, energy and land. However, our efforts to provide more of everything have hurt biodiversity, he said. ## Habitats Are Hurting All at once, important habitats are struggling.  Habitats are hurting for many reasons. Non-native species have been taking over environments where they don't belong. Chemicals have hurt plants and animals. Wetlands and mangroves that clean up pollution are disappearing. There is too much fishing in the oceans, he said. Climate change is getting worse. Climate change is also called global warming. Global warming is the rise in the planet's temperature. It will soon be the biggest threat to animals and plants, Watson said. Jake Rice is a scientist for Canada's government. He says our actions now will hurt people who live in the future.  ## Outlook Is Not Good Scientists say government and society need to change their ways. Individuals can also make changes to help. It is important to be less wasteful. That could mean using less electricity. It also means using less water.  The outlook is not good if society doesn't change. It still can, though, Watson said.