Earth is becoming a less diverse planet. WASHINGTON, D.C. — Earth is losing plants, animals and clean water at a dramatic rate. That's according to four new United Nations (U.N.) scientific reports that provide the most complete look at the state of biodiversity. Biodiversity refers to the variety of living things in a given environment, whether that's a forest, a stream or an ocean. The Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) assesses the state of biodiversity. IPBES is run by the United Nations Environment Program, and any country that is a member of the U.N. can join. Hundreds of scientists from around the world contributed to these new reports. The reports were approved by the 129 countries that are members to IPBES. ## Four Reports On Biodiversity The scientists met in Medellín, Colombia from Saturday, March 17, 2018, to Saturday, March 24, 2018. They issued four regional reports on how well animals and plants are doing in the Americas, Europe and Central Asia, Africa and the Asia-Pacific area. Their conclusion after three years of study was that all places are suffering when it comes to biodiversity.  Robert Watson, a prominent scientist, is the IPBES chairman. He said the study was about more than just critters. It is about keeping Earth livable for humans, considering we rely on biodiversity for food, clean water and public health. "This is undermining well-being across the planet, threatening us long-term on food and water," Watson said in an interview. Scientists pointed to last week's death of the last male northern white rhino in Africa, and severe declines in the numbers of elephants, tigers and pangolins. They said those are only the most visible and charismatic of species that are in trouble. Loss of biodiversity is a side effect of the world getting wealthier and more crowded with people, Watson said. Humans need more food, more clean water, more energy and more land, and the way society has tried to achieve that has cut down on biodiversity, he said. All at once, crucial habitats are falling victim to many factors. Non-native species have invaded places, and chemicals have hurt plants and animals. Meanwhile, wetlands and mangroves that clean up pollution are disappearing, and the world's waters are overfished, he said. Manmade climate change is getting worse, and global warming will soon hurt biodiversity as much as all the other problems combined, Watson said. Jake Rice, Canada's chief government scientist for fisheries and oceans, co-chaired the Americas report. He sees our actions now threatening the next generation. "We keep making choices to borrow from the future to live well today," he said.  Duke University conservationist Stuart Pimm, who wasn't part of the study team, said the reports make sense and are based on well-established scientific data: "Are things pretty dire? Yes." Here are some highlights from different regions' reports.  ## The Americas By the year 2050, the Americas will have 15 percent fewer plants and animals if current trends continue. That means there will be 40 percent fewer plants and animals in the Americas than in the early 1700s. Nearly a quarter of the species that were fully measured in the study are now threatened, Rice said. Overall, nearly two-thirds of all species are declining and more than one-fifth are "decreasing strongly," Rice said. ## Asia-Pacific Sonali Seneratna Sellamuttu, the Asia co-chair, said "all major ecosystems are threatened in the region." If trends continue, she said, there will be no fish left for commercial fishing by 2048\. Around that same time, the region will lose 45 percent of its biodiversity and about 90 percent of its crucial corals. Corals not only protect shoreline communities from waves and storms, they also provide a habitat for many sea creatures. ## Europe And Central Asia This is the region that Watson said may be doing the best, and still, 28 percent of the species that only live in Europe are now threatened. In the last decade, 42 percent of the land-based plant and animal species have declined. Wetlands have also been cut in half since 1970, according to Europe co-chair Mark Rounsevell. ## Africa Africa could lose half of its bird and mammal species by 2100\. More than 60 percent of the continent's people currently depend on natural resources for their livelihoods, said report co-chair Luthando Dziba of South African National Parks. Already, more than 20 percent of Africa's species are threatened, endangered or extinct. While scientists said governments and societies need to change their ways, individuals can make a difference, too, by using less energy, less water and eating less red meat, Watson said. The outlook is bleak if society doesn't change, but it still can, Watson said.