Putting those eight arms to work The octopus has been a mystery to humans for years. It seems like it could be from another planet. Its slithery slipperiness and more than the usual number of limbs are signs of the dark fear of the deep. Each octopus limb has a type of brain, adding to our differences. However, it turns out the sea creatures might be more like us than we thought. There is news that octopuses have been building their own cities in the deep. It's a story that seems straight out of a movie. Scientists have discovered that the so-called “gloomy octopus,” whose scientific name is octopus tetricus, is not that gloomy and alone after all. In Jervis Bay, in eastern Australia, the species has been seen to gather and communicate at a site that looks like a small city. Scientists have named it Octlantis. Octopuses even kick each other out of the site.  Professor David Scheel, who led the study, compares Octlantis to our own communities in his new report. The octopus behaviors may be similar to vertebrate social behavior, he said. Vertebrates are animals with a backbone, including people. The behaviors also are the product of natural selection, Scheel said. Natural selection is sometimes called "survival of the fittest." It means that animals with traits that help them will survive. Natural selection is a part of the theory of evolution. The theory is an idea about the way that types of life have developed over the years. The discovery is important, as it confirms scientists’ ideas about the culture of octopuses. Another nearby site in Jervis was found 50 feet below the surface in 2009\. It was thought to be an oddity. The site was formed around a large, human-made metal object.  The underwater city was named Octopolis. Peter Godfrey-Smith, writer of "Other Minds: The Octopus and the Evolution of Intelligent Life," dived the site. He saw it as a type of underwater island of safety in a dangerous area, protection against predators such as sharks, seals and dolphins. The new discovery proves that Octopolis is not the only one of its kind. Octlantis does not have any human object at its center. Its ocean architects have built walls from clam and scallop shells, the remains of their earlier meals. Stephanie Chancellor, who helped write the study, notes that there is more. These piles “were further sculpted to create dens, making these octopuses true environmental engineers,” she said. Like engineers, the octopuses build things. One reason for these underwater towns may be that there is a food supply nearby. However, as with humans, octopus city life is not perfect. The animals continually try to chase one another out of each other’s dens.  Godfrey-Smith thinks that these are places where generations of octopuses live. The environment may concentrate the evolution of octopus brains, he said. As such, they offer rare opportunities to observe the behavior of these animals. They are said to possess the intelligence of a human who is 3 years old. However, a closer study might not be a good idea. Here we are, worrying about the intelligence of robots, when all the while there is a mysterious being in our oceans. The octopuses might be getting ready for a takeover.