Putting those eight arms to work If animals are our other, there is nothing quite so other as the octopus. It is the alien with whom we share our planet, a contemporary evolutionary life form whose slithery slipperiness and unusual number of limbs symbolize the dark mystery and fear of the deep. Each octopus limb has a type of brain, adding to our differences. However, it turns out the sea creatures might be more like us than we thought. Now comes news that octopuses have been building their own cities in the deep. In a story straight out of James Cameron’s "The Abyss," scientists have discovered that the wonderfully named “gloomy octopus,” octopus tetricus, is not the loner we once thought it to be. In Jervis Bay, eastern Australia, the species has been seen to congregate, communicate and even evict one another at a site that resembles a small city. Marine biologists have named it Octlantis. Professor David Scheel, who led the research, draws direct comparisons to our own communities in his new report. “These behaviors are the product of natural selection, and may be remarkably similar to vertebrate complex social behavior,” he said. The discovery is important in that it confirms scientists’ suspicions about the culture of cephalopods, which include octopuses and cuttlefish. Another nearby site in Jervis, found 50 feet below the surface in 2009 and named Octopolis, was thought to be an exception, formed around a large, human-made metal object. Peter Godfrey-Smith, author of "Other Minds: The Octopus and the Evolution of Intelligent Life," who dived the site, saw it as a kind of “artificial reef,” an underwater island of safety in a dangerous area, a defense against predators such as sharks, seals and dolphins. But the discovery proves that Octopolis is not the only one of its kind. Lacking any human object at its heart, its aquatic architects have constructed walls from clam and scallop shells, the remains of their former meals. Not only that, but Stephanie Chancellor, who helped write the report, notes that these piles “were further sculpted to create dens, making these octopuses true environmental engineers.” One reason for these cephalopod towns may be good food resources but, as with humans, octopus city life is no utopia. There is visible aggression as the inhabitants continually try to chase one another out of each other’s dens. But Godfrey-Smith concludes that these are places where generations of octopuses live. The environment may concentrate the evolution of octopus brains, he said. As such, they offer unique opportunities to observe the behavior of animals said to possess the intelligence of a 3-year-old human. However, it might not be a good idea. Here we are, in our arrogance, worrying about the artificial intelligence of machines, when all the while there is an alien life form in the oceans, possibly getting ready for their own takeover bid.