Putting those eight arms to work The octopus has long been a mystery to humans. It is the alien with whom we share our planet, an evolutionary life form of our time whose slipperiness and more than the usual number of limbs symbolize the dark fear of the deep. Evolution is the process by which types of life have developed over many, many years. Each octopus limb has a type of brain, adding to our differences. However, it turns out the sea creatures might be more like us than we thought. There is news that octopuses have been building their own cities in the deep. It's a story that seems straight out of a science-fiction movie. Scientists have discovered that the so-called “gloomy octopus,” octopus tetricus, is not the loner we once thought it to be. In Jervis Bay, in eastern Australia, the species has been seen to gather, communicate and even kick one another out at a site that resembles a small city. Biologists have named it Octlantis. Professor David Scheel, who led the research, draws direct comparisons to our own communities in his new report. “These behaviors are the product of natural selection, and may be remarkably similar to vertebrate complex social behavior,” he said. Natural selection is the process by which organisms that are better suited to their environment survive, while others do not. The discovery is important, as it confirms scientists’ suspicions about the culture of cephalopods. Another nearby site in Jervis, found 50 feet below the surface in 2009 and named Octopolis, was thought to be an exception. It was formed around a large, human-made metal object. Peter Godfrey-Smith, author of "Other Minds: The Octopus and the Evolution of Intelligent Life," dived the site. He saw it as a kind of “artificial reef,” an underwater island of safety in a dangerous area, a defense against predators such as sharks, seals and dolphins. But the discovery proves that Octopolis is not the only one of its kind. It does not have any human object at its center. Its ocean builders have constructed walls from clam and scallop shells, the leftover parts of their former meals. Stephanie Chancellor, who helped write the report, notes that there is more. These piles “were further sculpted to create dens, making these octopuses true environmental engineers,” she said. One reason for these cephalopod towns may be good food resources nearby. However, as with humans, octopus city life is no utopia. There is visible hostility as the inhabitants continually try to chase one another out of each other’s dens. But Godfrey-Smith concludes that these are places where generations of octopuses live. The environment may concentrate the evolution of octopus brains, he said. As such, they offer unique opportunities to observe the behavior of these animals. They are said to be as intelligent as a 3-year-old human. However, a closer study might not be a good idea. Here we are, in our arrogance, worrying about the artificial intelligence of machines, when all the while there is an alien life form in the oceans. They might be getting ready to take over the world.