Putting those eight arms to work The octopus has been a little scary to people for years. It seems like it could be from another planet. The animal has eight slippery arms.  Each arm has its own kind of brain. It is very different from a person's brain. It turns out the animals might be more like us than we thought. Scientists say that octopuses have been building cities underwater. In the city is a certain type of octopus. This octopus is called octopus tetricus. It is also called the "gloomy octopus." Scientists used to think that this octopus lived alone. Turns out, they were wrong. In Australia, octopuses have been seen in a place that looks like a small city. Scientists named it Octlantis. Octopuses have a way of talking to each other there. They even kick each other out of the city. Professor David Scheel led a study on them. He compares Octlantis to our towns in his new report. The octopuses might be acting the way people do to each other, he said.  The octopus city is important. It backs up scientists’ ideas about what octopuses do. Another city in Australia was found below the water in 2009\. It was thought to be the only one. The city was formed around a large piece of metal made by people.  The first city was named Octopolis. Peter Godfrey-Smith wrote a book about octopuses. He went diving at the underwater city. He saw it as an underwater island where octopuses would be protected. They could hide from sharks and dolphins. The new city shows that Octopolis is not the only one. It does not have a part made by people. Octopuses built it from the shells of other animals. These shells come from animals the octopuses ate. Octopuses might have built the towns because food was nearby. Still, octopus cities are not perfect. The animals keep chasing one another out of each other’s spaces.  The cities may help the octopuses evolve, or change over a long period of time. They could make octopus brains better, Godfrey-Smith said. Octopus cities let us see how the animals act. They are said to be as smart as a person who is 3 years old.