Evidence shows humans used to hunt giant sloths. New Mexico's White Sands National Monument is filled with white dunes. The park is in the desert. There is not much large wildlife, though. Few animals in the region get much larger than a coyote or bobcat.  It was different 2 1/2 million years ago. That's when the Pleistocene period started. It ended about 12,000 years ago. During that time, mammoths and mastodons (which look like mammoths) walked the desert. So did saber-tooth cats, North American camels and huge, 8,000-pound sloths. Human Tracks Followed Animals - Ancient humans followed these creatures. We know this because the travelers left footprints. These prints tell us a lot about history. Including a recent discovery of something that happened in White Sands. Scientists found a human print inside a ground sloth's paw marks. Vince Santucci is a paleontologist with the U.S. National Parks Service. Paleontologists study fossils and other remains left behind by plants and animals. He said the area contains thousands of tracks. It's called a "megatrack." The megatrack in White Sands "is the largest one that we know of in North America," Santucci said. Fragile Tracks In 2011, paleontologists began a complete study of the megatrack. They found the first collection of human tracks, 27 footprints that vanished into a dune. The tracks are delicate. If they get wet, they will crumble shortly after being dug up. The tracks are also hard to date. A method called carbon dating was used. It looks at how the element carbon breaks down over time. This shows how old something is. In 2016, they invited experts from around the world to help examine the tracks. Matthew Bennett is a paleontologist in Britain. He accepted the invitation. The prints were clearly human, he said, with "really good toes, heels and arches." Bennett, however, focused on the sloth tracks. When he was digging up a sloth trackway, he found something odd. There were two prints: a human's and a sloth's squished together.  Humans Killed Off Giant Sloths Andrew R.C. Milner is a paleontologist from Utah. He said the discovery of the human-within-sloth prints was remarkable. This means a human followed in the sloth's footsteps 11,000 years ago. That's around the time the sloth went extinct. Humans drove sloths to extinction. The tracks led the scientists to an interesting site. There, it looks like a fight took place. Marks in the sand show the sloth turned to face approaching humans. Some scientists, do not think the meeting had a violent end. Others think that humans were on the hunt. Their meeting had its conclusion written in the sand.