Evidence shows humans used to hunt giant sloths. Each year 500,000 people visit New Mexico's White Sands National Monument. The park is famous for its white dunes made of gypsum, a soft white mineral that resembles sand. Few animals in the region get much larger than a coyote or bobcat. It was different 2 1/2 million years ago, however. That's when the Pleistocene period started, a time in earth's history that ended about 12,000 years ago. Mammoths and mastodons (which look like mammoths) walked the desert. So did saber-tooth cats, North American camels and huge, 8,000-pound sloths. Ancient humans followed these creatures. We know this because the travelers left footprints — physical evidence that people chased the giants. In a corner of White Sands, scientists recently found a human print inside a ground sloth's paw marks. White Sands Megatrack - The area contains thousands of tracks, said Vince Santucci, a paleontologist with the National Parks Service. Paleontologists study fossils and other remains left behind by plants and animals. The official term for such concentrated pathways is a megatrack. The megatrack in White Sands "is the largest one that we know of in North America." In 2011, researchers began a complete study of the megatrack at the nearby White Sands military space. This survey revealed the first collection of human tracks, 27 footprints that vanished into a dune. Santucci and other researchers measured the stride to predict where beneath the dune the next print should be. Then they excavated the dune. "And lo and behold, right where we anticipated they would have been, were human footprints," he said. The ancient walkers' prints were found in former lake beds. Over time, they were covered by a half-inch layer of sand. The tracks are delicate. If exposed to moisture, they will crumble shortly after excavation. 11,000 Years Ago Humans drove North American ground sloths to extinction around 11,000 years ago. Yet National Park Service paleontologists struggled to determine the age of the human prints. They used a method called carbon dating. It looks at how the element carbon breaks down over time. This shows how old something is. "The dates are coming up all over the place," Santucci said. In 2016, they invited experts from around the world to help examine the tracks. Matthew Bennett, a paleontologist in Britain, accepted the invitation. The bipedal prints were clearly human, he said, with "really good toes, heels and arches." Found Something Odd - Bennett, however, decided to focus on the sloth tracks. When he was digging up a sloth trackway, he found something odd. Two prints, a human's and a sloth's squished together.  Andrew R.C. Milner, a paleontologist from Utah, said the discovery of the human-within-sloth prints was remarkable. This means a human followed in the sloth's footsteps 11,000 years ago. Matteo Belvedere is a Swiss scientist who specializes in trackways. The dry environment is important to understanding these tracks, he said. That's because "there is quite a narrow amount of time you can walk on that surface to record your footprint," he said.  Human Closely Followed The Sloth The human probably followed the sloth within a day. This evidence of an exchange between human and extinct giant sloth is "unique in the world," Belvedere said. The tracks led the scientists to a site that suggests confrontation. Marks in the sand show the sloth turned to face approaching humans. Some scientists, however, do not think the encounter had a violent end.  Bennett and Belvedere think that humans were readying for a kill. Given the position of the claw and knuckle marks, the sloth may have reared up to unleash "the equivalent of a 'Go away!' roar," Bennett said. There's another line of toe prints, too. This suggests a second person approached the sloth at an angle. Perhaps that person was a hunter about to deliver a surprise deadly blow, Bennett said. This scene might lean toward wishful thinking, he admitted. Where The Tracks End "With a lot of time and money you can follow the sloth tracks as long as possible," Belvedere said. That scientist would eventually find where the animal either escaped or collapsed from a spear. Their meeting will have its conclusion written in the sand.