Nature in the city LOS ANGELES, Calif. — Southern California today is paved over with freeways and covered with cars and millions of people. Before it was so developed, this area was teeming with snakes, slugs, spiders, snails and other slimy, creepy, crawly creatures. Scientists at the Los Angeles County Natural History Museum believe critters and creatures can still thrive here. In their quest to build a better world, scientists recently enlisted thousands of people to find and catalog these creatures. Soon, the scientists will unveil the museum's Urban Nature Research Center, which studies nature in cities. Director Lori Bettison-Varga said the facility will serve as headquarters for a new study. This will be the first time in our country's history a large city like Los Angeles will be used as a research lab to study urban biodiversity, or the variety of life in a populated area. "Everybody thinks that Los Angeles is just this big, paved-over place, but it's not. It's a hotbed of biodiversity," said Lila Higgins, head of the center's citizen-science program. The scientists recently trained about 400 volunteers and armed some with backyard traps. These volunteers will beat the bushes and other spots in their neighborhoods in search of unusual flora and fauna. Some bugs will be taken to the center and examined, while many more will have their photos taken and emailed to the facility's 12 staffers for a closer look. The volunteers are helping with a cleverly named project called RASCAL, which stands for reptiles and amphibians in Southern California. They are also helping with a project called SLIME, or snails and slugs living in metropolitan environments. The museum is also encouraging anyone with a smartphone to pitch in. The research center is seeking photos of interesting bugs, reptiles and plants. The environmental group Conservation International placed Southern California on its list of 35 biodiversity hot spots. These are places that have varied ecosystems, where communities of living things such as plants and animals interact with nonliving things like water, soil, and air. These ecosystems include many plants, insects, lizards and other creatures, as well as plants and animals that are in danger. In Southern California, museum scientists recently discovered 43 species of phorid flies that they never knew existed in the region. Phorid flies look like fruit flies and have small, humped backs. They are known for running across surfaces instead of flying when trying to escape. "There's nothing super-special about phorid flies, except to us of course, because we're experts on them," Brian Brown said with a smile. As the museum's entomology curator, he oversees the collection of insects. He spoke Wednesday as a group of wide-eyed schoolchildren meticulously examined a collection of flies in an exhibit hall on the museum's ground floor.  "But they are indicators of what might also be here, and it just points out how little known this city is," Brown said. "Even though there are scientific institutions that have been here over a hundred years, we still don't know what species live here." Even of the species that are known, it is unclear how many of them got here. A common species of fruit flies, tiny bugs that like to eat rotten bananas and are able to dive-bomb with annoying ease, was recently discovered to be a species originally from El Salvador. Its ancestors likely arrived here by hitching a ride on a plane or ship filled with plants or food. This is the same way an Australian gecko discovered by the museum recently showed up. Brown says keeping track of such transplanted insects and reptiles helps to keep the ecology, or study of environmental systems, in balance. "If there are 5,000 species and a nasty invasive species gets in, it's much harder for it to get established," he said. After finishing his talk about flies, Brown ventured outside to the center's 3.5-acre garden. The garden is across the street from residence halls at the University of Southern California. The two locations are divided by a busy commuter rail line, highlighting the convergence of nature and development. Armed with a butterfly net, Higgins caught a ladybug while Brown flipped over a small bench and discovered an army of obscure bugs. Though unknown to most people, each bug was identifiable to him. Curiosity like this helped lead to the founding of the center. After the museum asked people in 2002 to show them any interesting spiders they came across for a study being done by Brown and his co-workers, they quickly received 5,000 specimens. "We thought, 'What else can we do with the public?'" Brown said. The information collected by the Urban Nature Research Center will mainly be used by scientists. Bettison-Varga said the information can also help city planners when they propose future projects for this dense area. With passion in his eyes, Brown said a better world for bugs and plants makes a better place for people. He explained that the decomposition of bugs, plants and other life improves the soil, in which the plants grow that clean the air. Paving over certain habitats, or environmental areas, disturbs all of this. "Ultimately the goal is to make L.A. a better place for biodiversity and for humans," he said.