Nature in the city LOS ANGELES, Calif. — Southern California is covered with freeways, cars and millions of people. Before it was so developed, the area was a place that snakes, slugs, spiders, snails and many other creatures called home. Scientists at the Los Angeles County Natural History Museum think critters and creatures can still thrive here. They recently enlisted thousands of people to find and catalog all sorts of them. The scientists will soon open the museum's Urban Nature Research Center. The center will study nature in populated areas like cities. Director Lori Bettison-Varga said the center will be the headquarters for a new study. This will be the first time in our country's history that a large city like Los Angeles will be used as a research lab to study urban biodiversity, or the variety of life in a populated area. "Everybody thinks that Los Angeles is just this big, paved-over place, but it's not. It's a hotbed of biodiversity," said Lila Higgins, head of the center's citizen-science program. The scientists recently trained about 400 volunteers and gave some of them backyard traps. These volunteers will look through bushes and other spots in their neighborhoods to find unusual plants and creatures. Some bugs will be taken to the center and examined. Others will have their photos taken and emailed to the center's 12 staffers for a closer look. The volunteers are helping with a project called RASCAL. This stands for reptiles and amphibians in Southern California. They are also helping with a project called  SLIME, which stands for snails and slugs living in metropolitan environments. The museum is encouraging people all over the area to take photos of interesting bugs, reptiles or plants. An environmental group called Conservation International put Southern California on a list of 35 places with a variety of life. These are places where communities of living things such as plants and animals interact with nonliving things like water, soil and air. Many plants, insects, lizards and other creatures live in these areas. Plants and animals that are in danger also live here. In Southern California, museum scientists recently discovered 43 species of phorid flies that they never knew existed in the region. Phorid flies look like fruit flies and have small, humped backs. They are known for running across surfaces instead of flying when trying to escape. "There's nothing super-special about phorid flies, except to us of course, because we're experts on them," said Brian Brown. He is the museum's entomology curator, which means he oversees the collection of insects. He spoke from the museum while a group of  schoolchildren examined flies in an exhibit hall.  Brown said that phorid flies can help scientists figure out what other species live in the area. He said there is so much about this city we don't know. "Even though there are scientific institutions that have been here over a hundred years, we still don't know what species live here," he said. Even of the species that are known, it is unclear how many of them got here. A common species of fruit flies was recently discovered as a species being originally from El Salvador. Its older family members likely arrived here on a plane or ship filled with plants or food. This is the same way an Australian gecko came to the museum. Brown said it is important to keep track of insects and reptiles that arrived from other places. This helps to keep the study of environmental systems in balance. He said that "If there are 5,000 species and a nasty invasive species gets in," it is difficult for that species to settle in.   After finishing his talk about flies, Brown went outside to the center's 3 1/2-acre garden. The garden is located across the street from residence halls at the University of Southern California. The two locations are divided by a busy commuter rail line. With a butterfly net, Higgins caught a ladybug while Brown flipped over a small bench and found an army of rare bugs. He was able to identify each one. Curiosity like this helped lead to the founding of the center. After the museum asked people in 2002 to show them any interesting spiders they came across for a study, they quickly received 5,000 specimens. "We thought, 'What else can we do with the public?'" Brown said. The information collected by the Urban Nature Research Center will mainly be used by scientists. Bettison-Varga said the information can also help city planners when they work on future projects in this populated area. Brown passionately said a better world for bugs and plants makes a better place for people. He explained that the decomposition of bugs, plants and other life improves the soil, in which the plants grow that clean the air. Paving over certain habitats, or environmental areas, disturbs all of this. "Ultimately the goal is to make L.A. a better place for biodiversity and for humans," he said.