Nature in the city LOS ANGELES, Calif. — Southern California is known for its freeways, cars and millions of people. It once was a place that snakes, slugs, spiders, and many other creatures called home. Scientists at the Los Angeles County Natural History Museum think critters can still live here. They asked thousands of people to help them look for creatures in the area. A new research center will soon open at the museum. It will study nature in cities. Lori Bettison-Varga manages the center. She said the center will be the main office for a new study. This will be the first time in U.S. history a large city like Los Angeles will be used to study a mixture of life in a populated area. "Everybody thinks that Los Angeles is just this big, paved-over place, but it's not," said Lila Higgins. She runs the center's citizen-science program. She added that L.A. is a good place to find different kinds of life. Scientists recently trained 400 volunteers and gave some backyard traps. The volunteers will look through bushes and other spots in their neighborhoods for unusual plants and animals.  The volunteers are helping with a project called RASCAL. This stands for reptiles and amphibians in Southern California. They are also helping with a project called  SLIME. This stands for snails and slugs living in metropolitan environments. The museum also asked people to take pictures of interesting bugs, creatures and  plants. An environmental group put Southern California on a list of 35 places with many kinds of life. These are places where living things like plants and animals mix with nonliving things like water, soil, and air. Some of the plants and insects living in these areas are in danger.  Scientists discovered 43 types of flies they did not know lived in California.  Brian Brown oversees the collection of insects at the museum. He said "there's nothing super-special" about these flies to most people. To the experts who study them, the flies are special.   Brown said these flies can help scientists figure out what else lives in the area. He said there is much about this city we do not know. Even though scientists have been studying plants and animals for a long time, we still have a lot to learn. We do not always know where something came from, even when we know what it is. One type of fruit fly was found to be from El Salvador, a country in central America. It probably came here on a plane or ship filled with plants or food.  Brown said it is important to keep track of critters that came from other places. This helps to keep environmental systems in balance. He said to imagine there are 5,000 types of insects and one is pesky. With so many other insects, it will be hard for the pesky one to take over. Brown and Higgins went outside to the center's garden. The garden is across the street from the University of Southern California. A busy commuter rail line separates them. Higgins caught a ladybug with a butterfly net. Brown flipped over a bench and named all the rare bugs he found.  Curiosity like this is how the center got started. In 2002, the museum asked people to show them interesting spiders they came across. They quickly got 5,000 spiders. "We thought, 'What else can we do with the public?'" Brown said. The information collected by the center will mostly be used by scientists. Bettison-Varga said the information can also help city planners working on projects in the city. Brown said a better world for bugs and plants makes a better place for people. He explained that when bugs and plants become rotten and break down, the soil improves. This helps the plants that clean the air. Paving over environmental areas can disturb this. "Ultimately the goal is to make L.A. a better place for biodiversity and for humans," he said.