Study shows the death rates in Australia from venomous bites and stings are actually low A lot of people are scared of Australia's animals. One example is Australia's box jellyfish. Biologists say it is the most toxic sea animal on the planet. The skin of this jellyfish is strong and harmful. It could hurt a person's heart very quickly. Australia has other venomous animals, too. This means they have a poison of some kind. The poison comes out when they sting or bite. Examples are some kinds of snakes, bees and other insects. Yes, Australian animals are venomous, said Ronelle Welton, who works at the University of Melbourne in Australia. But, this usually does not kill people, she said. Welton and a team of scientists released a new report. It is about venomous animals in Australia. They studied how many people went to the hospital after a venomous bite or sting. The team also studied the number of people who died from these animals or insects. They looked at the cases from 2000 to 2013. Venomous bites and stings hospitalized many thousands of people during that time. This seems like a lot of people. But it is only a small part of all those who live in Australia. This means it is not likely that people would go to the hospital or die from bites and stings. Poison from the stings or bites killed only 64 people during this time period. Spider bites did not kill anyone during this time period. Snake bites killed 27 people. Box jellyfish stings killed three people. The numbers surprised Welton. She thought more people would be harmed. Being allergic to stings and bites is why people went to the hospital. It was not the poison itself. Many people died because of how their bodies responded after the bite or sting. Welton thinks Australia's good health care is one reason not to be afraid. "You can get to a hospital very quickly" for help, she said. Also, Australians know how to live near the animals. They try not to do things to scare the animals. The animals may sting or bite when they feel in danger. They do it for protection. And most of these animals are small in size. They runaway from people rather than attack them. "I would happily go camping in the outback of Australia," Welton said. "Our critters don't come after you."