Study shows the death rates in Australia from venomous bites and stings are actually low A lot of people are scared of Australia's animals. One TV show even says: "Whether it walks, crawls, swims or hops, even the unlikeliest animal could be one of Australia's killers." It is true that strange and very strong life thrives there. One example is Australia's box jellyfish. Biologists consider it to be the most toxic sea animal on the planet. The skin of this jellyfish can release chemicals strong enough to stop a human heart within minutes. TV shows and facts like these can make it seem like Australia is where all things venomous are found, says Ronelle Welton. She is a public health expert at the University of Melbourne. Yes, Australian animals are venomous, but they very rarely kill people, according to a report from Welton and her team. The scientists looked at the people who had died or been sent to the hospital because of venomous Australian animals between 2000 and 2013\. They studied the number of people who went to hospitals and the reports on people who died. Venomous bites and stings hospitalized more than 41,000 people over those 13 years. This seems like a lot of people, but it is a small portion of all the people who live in Australia. Venom, or the poison that comes from the stings and bites, killed 64 people during this time period. The results surprised Welton. "I was expecting to see larger numbers," she said. "Just the number of people hospitalized, I thought, would be a lot larger." Many more people drown or are fatally burned than die from venomous stings or bites. Welton's study described what is venomous and what is dangerous. Allergic reactions to insect stings, not the venom, were responsible for a third of the hospital admissions. More than half of the reported deaths came from the body responding after the bite or sting. Spider bites caused a third of hospital admissions. But, the bites did not kill anyone during the 13-year period. Venomous snakes only caused a total of 27 deaths during the time period studied by the report. The box jellyfish was responsible for taking three lives, the study found. This is the same number of deaths as tick bites. Australian ants caused two deaths. Bryan Fry studies venomous lifeforms at the University of Queensland. Fry was not a part of Welton's study. But, he agrees Australia's animals make a lot of people nervous. He thinks the study will help people feel more calm. Welton said the study did not explore causes behind the numbers of hospital visits or deaths. But, the large difference between the numbers may be because Australia has a good health care system. "You can get to a hospital very quickly" for treatment, she said. In the United States, Americans living in bear country know what to do. They carry pepper spray and play dead if they end up near a bear. Australians also know how to behave around the animals that share their island. In fact, snakes have killed an average of just two people a year in Australia. This number is roughly equal to the number of people hurt yearly by bears in the United States. Still, there signs warning swimmers at Australia's beaches. They remind people to be careful of the jellyfish. People are worried about them. Many buy special bodysuits to protect them when they go in the ocean. Prowling wildlife in Australia that look for people can also be far-fetched. Many of the venomous animals found there are small in size. They will flee rather than attack if spooked. "I would happily go camping in the outback of Australia," Welton said. "Our critters don't come after you."