Study shows the death rates in Australia from venomous bites and stings are actually low A lot of people are scared of Australia's animals. A National Geographic show called "Australia's Deadliest Attacks," even says: "Whether it walks, crawls, swims or hops, even the unlikeliest animal could be one of Australia's killers." It is true that strange and powerful life thrives on the island continent. For example, biologists consider Australia's box jellyfish to be the most toxic marine animal on the planet. The skin of this jellyfish has cells that release chemicals strong enough to stop a human heart within minutes. TV shows and facts like these can make it seem like Australia is "the epicenter of everything venomous," says Ronelle Welton. She is a public health expert at the University of Melbourne. Yes, Australian animals are venomous, but they very rarely kill, according to research Welton and her team recently conducted. Their report will be published in an upcoming issue of Internal Medicine Journal. It reviewed hospitalizations and deaths from venomous Australian animals between 2000 and 2013. The scientists studied medical admission numbers, findings from officials who investigate deaths and autopsy reports. They determined that venomous bites and stings hospitalized more than 41,000 people over those 13 years. This is 199 people per 100,000 people in the population. Venom, or the poisonous substance that comes from the stings and bites, killed 64 people during the same time period. The results surprised even Welton. "I was expecting to see larger numbers," she said. "Just the number of people hospitalized, I thought, would be a lot larger." Many more people drown or are fatally burned than die from venomous stings or bites. Welton's study described what is venomous and what is dangerous. Allergic reactions to bee and wasp stings, not the venom, were responsible for a third of the hospital admissions. More than half of the reported deaths, too, stemmed from anaphylactic shock after an insect bite or sting triggered a reaction. Anaphylactic shock is the body's severe reaction to something it is allergic to. Spider bites caused 30 percent of hospital admissions. But, the bites did not kill anyone during the 13-year period. Venomous snakes were to blame for 15 percent of hospital admissions there. They caused a total of 27 deaths during the time period studied by the report. Bryan Fry is a venom expert at the University of Queensland. Fry was not a part of the study, but agrees there is a lot of nervousness about Australia's venomous animals. He thinks the results will help people realize there is not as much to worry about. The box jellyfish? This sea animal was responsible for taking three lives, the study found. This is the same number of deaths as tick bites. Australian ants caused two deaths. Welton said the study did not explore causes behind the numbers. But, the large difference between the number of hospitalizations and deaths might be because Australia has a good health care system. "You can get to a hospital very quickly" for treatment, she said. In the way that Americans living in bear country know to carry pepper spray and to play dead around grizzlies, Australians know how to behave around the animals that share their island. In fact, snakes killed on average just two people a year in Australia. This rate is roughly equal to the number of yearly grizzly bear injuries in the United States. Still, signs warning swimmers to beware of jellyfish are not uncommon at Australia's northern beaches. A nylon bodysuit is reportedly thick enough to protect people from a jelly's stinging missiles. This has created a manufacturing industry for the stinger suits. Exaggerated, too, are rumors of wildlife on the prowl in Australia. Many of the venomous animals found in Australia are small in size and will flee rather than attack if spooked. "I would happily go camping in the outback of Australia," Welton said. "Our critters don't come after you."