Push is on to save African vultures MAGADI, Kenya — African vultures are facing tough times. Already thought of as ugly and a symbol of death and decay by many cultures, their numbers are dropping because of poaching, poisonings and collisions with electricity towers and wind turbines. Species under threat are put on an international "red list," kept by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources. Four of Africa's 11 vulture species were listed as critically endangered this year. The population of seven of those species fell by at least 80 percent in the past 50 years, according to a study in Conservation Letters, an online scientific magazine. Still, how many people really care about such a creature? American writer Mark Twain saw one and described it as having a "bald, red, queer-shaped head, featherless red places here and there on his body, intense great black eyes set in featherless rims of inflamed flesh." Other threatened "sexy, charismatic species" like the lion, rhinoceros and elephant overshadow the vulture, said Masumi Gudka. She is the vulture conservation manager in Kenya for BirdLife International, a group with branches in 120 countries. "You have to be creative" in the hunt for an "innovative way to sell the species that people think are ugly," Gudka said. Vultures, for example, get positive spin from Birdorable, a website that sells clothing and other items with soft, rounded images of birds, she said. On a recent day, Gudka walked toward a cliff in Kenya's Rift Valley. The valley is home to the Rueppell's species of vulture, which is on the brink of extinction.  About 200 Rueppell's vultures were in the sky or on the cliff overlooking the dry bed of Lake Kwenia in southern Kenya. Researchers believe the species may have been there for centuries, ranging widely on hunting expeditions. The birds, circling high overhead, were black dots.  There is hope for this species, named for a 19th-century German naturalist. While the refuge is on private land, conservationists want to raise money to buy it and create a preserve. Livestock herders from the Maasai tribe would help run the preserve. They could benefit from any ecotourism while keeping a protective eye on the vultures in their midst. "This area has so much potential beyond just vultures," said Darcy Ogada. He works for the Peregrine Fund, a group based in Idaho, that seeks to protect birds of prey. Birds in this bleak landscape also include unique hawks, eagles, doves and buzzards, according to Ben Mugambi, who runs a company that gives tours in Kenya. Vultures get a bad rap because they gather around the dead and the dying. Nigerian writer Chinua Achebe wrote a poem called "Vultures," describing the seeming mismatch in how vultures behave. In the poem he contrasts the image of a vulture nestling affectionately with its mate in a tree with their ghastly feeding on the eyes and bowels of a swollen corpse in a trench filled with water. Vulture body parts are prized in traditional medicine in some areas of Africa. Some people believe they cure disease, increase children's intelligence and guarantee success in business and gambling. Such beliefs make the birds a target for poachers. Threats also include poison laid to kill wild dogs or other mammals that attack livestock. Additionally, rhino and elephant poachers sometimes poison vultures because they circle above carcasses. The hovering vultures give away the location of poachers to park rangers. At least 1,500 vultures died in 10 such poisoning incidents between 2011 and 2014 in southern Africa, according to bird conservationists. South Asian vulture populations are also a small fraction of what they used to be. They are dying because they feed on dead farm animals treated with diclofenac, a veterinary drug that is toxic to vultures. Government bans on the drug, however, have helped keep the numbers from falling further and small increases in vulture populations have been recorded in some areas. Twain seemed to understand the misunderstood bird. In the passage that he wrote after a sea voyage in the late 19th century, he noted that the vulture that landed on his vessel had "a business-like style, a selfish, conscienceless, murderous aspect — the very look of a professional assassin, and yet a bird which does no murder."