Push is on to save African vultures MAGADI, Kenya — African vultures are in trouble. Many cultures think the birds are ugly and a symbol of death and decay. Their numbers are dropping on the continent because of poaching, poisonings and crashing into electricity towers and wind turbines. Bird and animal species under threat are put on an international "red list." Four of Africa's 11 vulture species were listed as critically endangered this year. The online scientific magazine Conservation Letters published a study in 2015. It found that seven of the vulture species fell in number by at least 80 percent in the past 50 years.  Still, how many people care about such an unattractive creature?  American author Mark Twain has written about the vulture. He described it as having a "bald, red, queer-shaped head, featherless red places here and there on his body, intense great black eyes set in featherless rims of inflamed flesh." The vulture draws less attention than more attractive, threatened species like the lion, rhinoceros and elephant, said Masumi Gudka. She is the vulture conservation manager in Kenya for BirdLife International. The group works in 120 countries. "You have to be creative" in finding ways to get people to care about species "that people think are ugly," she said. Vultures, for example, are given a better image on the website Birdorable. It sells clothing and other items with soft, rounded images of birds. On a recent day, Gudka headed toward a cliff in the Rift Valley in southern Kenya. The valley is home to the critically endangered Rueppell's species of vulture. About 200 Rueppell's vultures were in the sky or in a cliff overlooking the dry bed of Lake Kwenia. Researchers believe the species may have been there for centuries, hunting far and wide. The birds, circling high overhead, were like black dots.  There is hope for this species, named for a 19th-century German scientist. Conservationists want to raise money to buy the land near the lake and create a preserve. Herders from the Maasai tribe would support the preserve while tending to livestock. They could benefit from any tourism while keeping a protective eye on the vultures.  The area has much more to offer than just vultures, said Darcy Ogada of the Peregrine Fund. Based in Idaho, the group seeks to protect birds of prey. The bare landscape is also home to a great variety of birds, like unique hawks, eagles and doves.  Vultures get a bad rap because they gather around the dead and the dying. An African writer, Chinua Achebe, wrote a poem called "Vultures." In it, he described contrasting images of vultures. He wrote about a vulture cuddling with its mate in a tree, the day after it had fed on the eyes and bowels of a swollen corpse in a ditch filled with water. Vulture body parts are prized in traditional medicine in some areas of Africa. Some people believe they cure disease, increase children's intelligence and guarantee success in business and gambling. Their high value makes the birds a target for poachers. Threats to the vulture include poison laid to kill wild dogs or other mammals that attack livestock. In addition, vultures are sometimes poisoned by rhino and elephant poachers. The birds circle above carcasses or bodies of dead animals. They alert rangers to the location of the poachers. At least 1,500 vultures died in 10 such poisoning incidents between 2011 and 2014 in southern Africa, say bird conservation groups. South Asian vulture populations are also much smaller than they once were. They are dying because they eat dead farm animals treated with diclofenac, a drug that is harmful to vultures. Government bans on the drug, however, have helped keep the numbers from falling further and small increases in vulture populations have been recorded in some areas. Mark Twain seemed to understand the bird. He wrote a passage after a sea voyage in the late 19th century. He noted that the vulture that landed on his ship had "the very look of a professional assassin, and yet a bird which does no murder."