Push is on to save African vultures MAGADI, Kenya — Many people think the vulture is an ugly bird. Across the world, it is often seen as a symbol for death. In Africa, however, vultures are the ones having a tough time. People are killing them. They also crash into electricity towers and wind turbines and die. Their numbers are falling fast. Animals that could die out forever are put on a list kept by a nature group. Africa has 11 types, or species, of vultures. Four of those species were on the list this year. One study found that seven vulture species fell in number by at least four-fifths in the past 50 years.  People care more about more attractive animals like the lion, rhinoceros and elephant, said Masumi Gudka. She works for BirdLife International in Kenya, a country in Africa.  One day not long ago, Gudka headed toward a cliff, in the Rift Valley in southern Kenya. The valley is home to Rueppell's vulture. The bird was named for a scientist from Germany.  About 200 Rueppell's vultures were in the sky or on the cliff. Scientists believe the species may have been there for hundreds of years. The birds were flying in circles high overhead. They looked like small black spots.  Experts think there is still hope for Rueppell's vulture.  Groups that work to protect wildlife are helping to save it. They plan to raise money to buy land in the valley. It would become a preserve. Herders from the Maasai tribe also live in the area. They would help run the preserve. Visitors to the preserve would spend money that would help the Maasai. The Maasai herd cows on the land. They would make sure no one harms the rare birds.  People do not like vultures because they gather around the dead and the dying. Chinua Achebe was an African writer. He wrote a poem called "Vultures." Achebe tried to show how strange the birds were. He wrote about a vulture showing love to its mate in a tree. Just the day before, though, the birds ate a dead person. Vulture body parts are used for traditional medicine in some areas of Africa. Some people believe the parts can cure disease. They think the parts can make children smarter. For these reasons, poachers can sell vulture body parts for a high price. Vultures are harmed in many ways. Poison is put out by farmers. They are trying to kill animals like wild dogs that attack farm animals. The poison also kills the vultures who eat the dead bodies. Poachers who kill rhinos and elephants also poison the vultures. The birds circle above bodies of the dead animals. Rangers see the birds and come after the poachers. About 1,500 vultures died in 10 such poisonings between 2011 and 2014 in southern Africa. Groups that protect birds collected these numbers. Many vultures in the southern parts of Asia are also dying. Farm animals are treated with a medicine that kills vultures. The birds die when they feed on the dead farm animals. Now people are being told by their governments to stop using the medicine. As a result, the numbers of vultures have gone up in some places.