The more you eat, the more you grow The blue whale has a body the length of a jet airliner. Its heart is the size of a car and its tongue weighs as much as an elephant. Blue whales are part of the baleen whale group. They are the largest animals on the planet.  Now, researchers say they might know why the whales have become so enormous. Some whales are more than 32 feet in length. They probably started out at just 6 to 10 feet. This may be because of changes to their food. It is likely more food was easier for the whales to get to. “We think of [baleen whales] as being giants," said Graham Slater. He is a biologist and helped write the research. But, really, they have only been giants for a small part of the 36 million years they have existed. Slater and other scientists studied the lengths of 63 baleen whales. Their goal was to determine what made them longer over time. They used measurements from fossilized skulls and the lengths of 13 living species. The lengths of the whales and where they were located on the baleen whale family tree were put into a series of computer models. This helped scientists to examine how and when gigantism cropped up. Gigantism is the scientific name for the trait of being very large. The results reveal gigantism emerged independently in several branches of the family tree, including the bowhead and the right whales.  The team also found that it was not just the largest whales that became bigger over time. The smallest whales found today are also much larger than the smallest species of whales that no longer exist. Further study revealed that baleen whales had gradually evolved into different sizes for 30 million years. What's more, a step change began to take place between 4.5 million and a few hundred thousand years ago. The recent timing rules out the possibility that the emergence of gigantism was caused by other factors. Examples of these factors are the evolution of bulk filter feeding or large predators, such as giant sharks, the scientists said. They also rule out that the gigantism was a response to falling global ocean temperatures. Instead, they say, it was probably systems driving cold, nutrient-rich water upward in regions around the continental shelf, or the shallower parts of the ocean near the continents. This was caused at least in part by the onset of glaciers forming in the northern hemisphere. These systems emerged about 3 million years ago and resulted in dense pockets of prey rather than an even spread. That, says Slater, drove the evolution of gigantism in baleen whales. “The bigger your mouth, the more you can take in and the less energy it costs you to do it,” he said. Being large also helps when it comes to moving to the next pocket of prey. “If you are big you can just store more energy – you have got a bigger fuel tank to get you where you want to go,” said Slater, comparing the whale's energy levels to a car. Unlike a car, though, for a whale, it actually costs less energy to be larger. This means the whale can use that energy to grow larger, rather than losing weight swimming and not eating. Olivier Lambert is a paleontologist from the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences. He was not involved in the study, but said the research provided a convincing scenario for one of the last stages in the evolution of size among baleen whales. However, he said it was likely that other factors could also have played a role in the development of the animals’ size, particularly earlier in their evolution. For example, when larger predators started becoming more common, a whale's size could be an advantage since larger animals are less likely to get eaten. Another possible factor is changes to the climate. Lambert believes the latest research is important for sea life today. It emphasizes the uncertain situation that today's baleen whales face. This includes major threats that climate change has on the oceans and the sea life that the whales need for food. Slater agrees. “If we do shut down that cold water supply, if climate change does go the route we think it is going, it is going to spell real bad news for these big baleen whales,” he said.