The more you eat, the more you grow The blue whale has a body the length of a jet airliner, with a heart the size of a car and a tongue that weighs the same as an elephant. Baleen whales – a group that includes blue whales – are the largest animals on the planet. Now researchers say they might have solved the mystery of why they became so big. Scientists say the shift toward sizes of more than 32 feet in length probably cropped up in baleen whales that were 6 to 10 feet just 2 to 3 million years ago. This may be driven by changes in the distribution of their food in the ocean. “We think of [baleen whales] as being giants," said Graham Slater, who is an evolutionary biologist and co-author of the research from the University of Chicago. But, really, they have only been giants for about 3.6 million years and have been around 10 times longer than that. Slater and other scientists studied the lengths of 63 baleen whales to determine what made them longer over time. They used measurements from fossilized skulls and the lengths of 13 living species. The lengths of the whales and where they were located on the baleen whale family tree were put into a series of computer models. This helped scientists to examine how and when gigantism, or the trait of unusually large size, cropped up. The results reveal gigantism emerged independently in several branches of the family tree, including the bowhead and the right whales.  The team also found that it was not just the largest whales that became bigger over time, but that the smallest whales found today are also much larger than the smallest extinct species. Further analysis revealed that baleen whales had been gradually diversifying in size for 30 million years. What's more, a step change began to take place between 4.5 million and a few hundred thousand years ago. The recent timing rules out the possibility that the emergence of gigantism was caused by the evolution of bulk filter feeding or large predators, such as giant sharks, the scientists said. It also rules out that the gigantism was a response to falling global ocean temperatures. Instead, they say, it was probably systems driving cold, nutrient-rich water upward in regions around the continental shelf. This was caused at least in part by the onset of glaciers forming in the northern hemisphere. These systems emerged about 3 million years ago and resulted in dense pockets of prey rather than an even spread of prey that the whales had to find. That, says Slater, drove the evolution of gigantism in baleen whales. “The bigger your mouth, the more you can take in and the less energy it costs you to do it,” he said, adding that being large also helps when it comes to moving to the next pocket of prey. “If you are big you can just store more energy – you have got a bigger fuel tank to get you where you want to go,” said Slater. “If you are big, your cost of transport is also lower so you get more miles to the gallon.” Olivier Lambert is a paleontologist from the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences. He was not involved in the study, but said the research provided a convincing scenario for one of the last stages in the evolution of size among baleen whales. However, he said it was likely that other factors could also have played a role in the development of the animals’ size, particularly earlier in their evolution. Some of those other factors are the evolution of large predators and other climate changes. But Lambert believes the latest research has implications for modern ecosystems. It emphasizes the uncertain situation that today's baleen whales face, such as major threats that climate change has on oceanic circulation and sea life that the whales rely on for food. Slater agrees. “If we do shut down that cold water supply, if climate change does go the route we think it is going, it is going to spell real bad news for these big baleen whales,” he said.