Icelanders have been hunting whales for centuries, but now there is a growing demand by tourists to see the animals alive Iceland's whales have often ended up as steaks on a plate. However, times are changing. Whales are now the stars of a strong tourism scene as visitors stream to the North Atlantic island. "Minke whale at two o'clock, about 200 meters out!" shouts tour guide Alberto Alejandro. He is on a boat of whale watchers going slowly up the coast. The sighting is fleeting. Only the tail fin is visible when the whale resurfaces for air, but it's enough to make the 60 passengers "oooh" and "ahhh" in joy. "It's one of the things we absolutely wanted to do on our first trip here," says Joachim Holm, a Swedish tourist. "We don't get many opportunities to see live whales." Animal rights workers say that whale-watching boats disturb the whales. However, they agree that it is better to bother the whales than to kill them. In Husavik Bay and Faxafloi Bay, more than 355,000 people went whale watching in 2016. That is four times more than a decade ago. Whale-watching boats go through Faxafloi Bay, the same waters where minke whales are hunted. Iceland started whaling again in 2003\. It turned its back on a 1986 worldwide rule, along with Norway. Japan also allows whaling. Officially, they say it is for science, even if a large share of the whale meat ends up for sale. Iceland allows hunting of minke whales, which are not endangered, or at risk of dying out. The number of minkes is estimated at around 32,000\. The population is considered stable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. Iceland stopped its fin whale hunt last year. The move came after Japan, its main place to sell, introduced tough rules. The fin whale has been listed as endangered since 1996\. Its worldwide population has dropped by well over half since 1929. Alessandro Rosa is an Italian tourist. He said he respected Iceland's whaling traditions, which have been a part of life since the 1200s. However, he added, "I've never eaten whale meat and I don't intend to taste it." Icelanders themselves eat little whale meat. So the country's whale hunt is mainly for tourists. More than 2 million people are expected to visit the island this year. Whalers have killed fewer whales in recent years. They blame poor weather and warmer waters. The warmth is pushing the whales to follow mackerel fish, their main source of food, closer to Greenland. The water is colder there. IP-Utgerd Ltd. is an Icelandic company that hunts minke whales. The company killed 17 whales in 2017\. That number is down from 46 whales in 2016 and 52 in 2012\. A record 81 whales were killed in 2009. The restaurant Thrir Frakkar has offered whale meat since it opened in 1989. Asian tourists enjoy it the most. "They're more used to whale meat. It's more a part of their culture," said the restaurant's cook, Stefan Ulfarsson. Sarah Krieger is a tourist from Florida. She does not object to eating whale meat as long as the population is managed "responsibly." "Humans are at the top of the food chain," she said. Whale hunting still brings a profit, say those in the business.  The price of whale meat has more than doubled in 10 years to 20 euros ($24) a kilogram. It costs more than chicken and pork. A kilogram is just over 2 pounds.  Yet tourists to Iceland are eating less whale meat than before. In 2016, only about 1 in 10 tourists said they ate whale meat during their visit. In 2009, about 4 out of 10 tried it. Those numbers come from studies by the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW). The head of the Icelandic branch of IFAW, Sigursteinn Masson, said attitudes were changing. He expects whaling will end soon, he said. However, Gunnar Bergmann Jonsson, the head of the whale-hunting company disagreed. He sees no need to end the practice as long as minke numbers remain strong and the species is not endangered.