Crab-fishing poses a whale of a problem LOS ANGELES — In 2014 and continuing this year, there has been an alarming surge in the number of whales getting tangled in crabbing gear. More whales feeding in areas that are heavily fished have led to the entanglements, experts say. Environmental groups are urging state fisheries managers to implement immediate reforms to protect whales from injury and death. State officials set the rules for fishing areas, known as fisheries, off the coast of California. Crabbers — crab fisherman — are eager to work with environmental groups to prevent whales from getting caught in their fishing gear. Still, they say the environmentalists have another agenda: using the recent entanglements to pressure the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) to keep humpback whales on the endangered species list. In February, NOAA announced it was considering removing some groups of humpback whales from the list. “There are a couple of things going on here, and they’ve become political,” said Jennifer Renzullo, a biologist at the University of California, Davis. “For some reason, perhaps because of unusual conditions at sea, humpback and gray whales that tend to migrate through the areas such as Monterey Bay have been spending more time there. Coincidentally, the crab population was healthiest there this year, in terms of harvesting. “More fishing pressure,” she said, “combined with more whales hanging out in the area, are contributing to a spike in entanglements.” In 2014, at least 30 whales — most of them grays and humpbacks — were entangled in fishing lines that run between buoys floating on the ocean's surface and crab traps on the ocean floor. That’s a record number, and nearly twice the number of entangled whales reported in 2013, according to NOAA. Seven of those whales died after vertical lines cut into their flesh and blubber. Seven others were disentangled and released from the lines. The fate of the remaining entangled whales remains unknown. So far in 2015, at least 25 entanglements have been reported off the coast of California. A task force with representatives from the fishing industry, state and federal agencies and conservation groups is attempting to address the problem. But last week, a coalition of environmental groups urged the California Department of Fish and Wildlife and the California Fish and Game Commission to make significant changes before the next Dungeness crab fishing season off the West Coast begins in the fall. The current Dungeness crab season ends June 30. The coalition is led by the Center for Biological Diversity, Earthjustice and Oceana. Measures under consideration include closing fisheries in areas where whales are feeding, use of lines that break away when a trap catches onto a whale, and more efforts to collect lost and abandoned fishing gear. “It’s heartbreaking to know so many whales are getting tangled up in fishing gear,” said Catherine Kilduff, an attorney with the Center for Biological Diversity. “They often drown or drag gear around until they are too exhausted to feed. Even more disturbing is that this problem is only getting worse.” Renzullo, the biologist from UC Davis, is not so sure. “My guess is that the number of whale entanglements will drop off as the year goes on,” she said. “About 90 percent of the crabs harvested are caught within six weeks of the season opening — then the catch drops off exponentially.” Kevin Pinto has been harvesting Dungeness crabs off the coast of California for 36 years. He agrees that reforms are needed, but he suggested that environmental groups may be playing up the problem “to assure that humpback whales are not delisted” from the endangered species list. In February, NOAA announced that it was re-examining the humpback whale’s placement under the Endangered Species Act. NOAA is looking at humpback whales in 14 different groups. It is suggesting that 10 of these 14 groups no longer need to be listed as endangered, including some humpbacks that spend winters off the coast of California. Over the last four decades, protection efforts have led to steady population growth for humpbacks. “In our opinion, humpback whales still need federal protection,” Kilduff said. “Humpbacks off California are vulnerable to a wide range of threats: exposure to DDT (chemical insecticide) and trash of all kinds, ship strikes, contaminants washed into the sea from mainland population centers and entanglement in fishing gear.”