About 17 million years ago at least one whale swam in a new direction. His bones have been found and scientists are studying them. They are learning about the climate back then. Scientists think they have found important evidence that can help them understand how early human beings evolved, or developed. The evidence is the remains, or fossil, of a whale. The whale likely took a wrong turn up an African river about 17 million years ago. Scientists said the fossil helps to show when the climate became drier in an area called the East African Plateau. The climate change created an environment where it was better for the ancestors of humans to walk upright on two feet. That led to the development of humans as we now know them. The beak and jawbone for the 22-foot whale had been lost for 30 years, and were finally found in 2011. Scientists say the bones help show that because the whale dates to 17 million years ago, the East African Plateau probably began rising at the same time. The scientists wrote a study about what they found. The East African Plateau is known as the cradle of humankind. Major changes in the climate there are believed to have slowly changed the land. Dense, humid forests became grasslands with fewer trees. The change meant that evolving human ancestors could live better by standing up and walking on two feet than moving on their hands and feet. “The whale is telling us all kinds of things,” study co-author Louis Jacobs said. He studies the remains, or fossils, of animals and plants. The whale tells us when the plateau started rising, which Jacobs calls an "uplift." He said it caused the change in "climate that led to humans. It’s amazing.” The whale fossil was found in 1964. Jacobs first read about the find in a 1975 research paper, and started searching for it in 1980. “It was protected by a plaster jacket, so you couldn’t really see it,” he said of the fossil. “I suspect nobody knew what it was.” Somebody at Harvard University finally located the fossil there in 2011, Jacobs said. Jacobs had the specimen analyzed. Then he contacted Henry Wichura, a scientist in Germany. Wichura had been studying the plateau region, trying to determine when it started rising. But something was missing. Scientists needed evidence in the earth that showed when the uplift started, Wichura said. Notes from the original discovery helped to show where and how high up the fossil had been found. The notes said the fossils were found more than 2,000 feet above modern sea level. Then scientists looked up incidents of whales swimming upriver from the sea. The river had to be large and had to rise gradually, Jacobs said. The whale would have had to swim a long way up, he said. No whale had swum to anywhere close to 2,000 feet above sea level. The Antarctic minke whale took the longest known detour, swimming more than 600 miles up the Amazon River. Still, it only got about 3 feet above the Atlantic Ocean sea level. The scientists considered the sea level and shape of the African coast at the time. They decided the whale would have traveled 372 to 559 miles from the Indian Ocean. That meant it would have reached an elevation of 78 to 121 feet. So, the area must have been pushed up at least 1,935 feet since the whale died to reach the 2,000-foot elevation it is today. The whale bone was found in a thick layer of broken rocks beneath a lava flow that was 17 million years old. Around it were animal fossils from a time when Africa was attached to Europe and Asia. There is evidence that the uplift happened around a time when the local climate got drier. The drying changed a warm, damp forest into grasslands with more widely spaced trees. Scientists think that this kind of climate was better for mammals that could straighten their backs and walk longer distances on two feet. This eventually led to modern humans.