Crab-fishing poses problem for whales LOS ANGELES — For more than a year, California state officials, crab fishermen and environmental groups have been watching with alarm as increasing numbers of whales have been getting tangled in fishing gear. Experts say more whales are feeding in areas that are also being heavily fished, leading to the increase in whales getting caught in fishing lines. Environmental groups are urging state fisheries managers to take immediate steps to protect whales from injury and death. Crabbers — crab fisherman — welcome efforts to protect whales. Still, they say the environmental groups may be using the entanglements to pressure the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) into keeping humpback whales on the endangered species list. In February, NOAA announced it was considering removing some groups of humpback whales from the list. “There are a couple of things going on here, and they’ve become political,” said Jennifer Renzullo, a biologist at the University of California, Davis. “For some reason, humpback and gray whales that tend to migrate through areas such as Monterey Bay have been spending more time there,” Renzullo said. “Coincidentally, the crab population was healthiest there this year." She explained that more fishing, combined with more whales hanging out in the area, is "contributing to a spike in entanglements.” In 2014, at least 30 whales — most of them grays and humpbacks — were entangled in vertical lines. These fishing lines connect buoys floating on the surface to crab traps on the ocean floor. That’s a record number. It’s nearly twice the number of entangled whales reported in 2013, according to NOAA. Seven of those whales died after vertical lines cut into their flesh and blubber. Seven others were disentangled and released from the lines. The fate of the other entangled whales remains unknown. So far in 2015, at least 25 entanglements have been reported off the coast of California. The fishing industry, state and federal agencies and conservation groups are working together to address the problem. But last week, a coalition of environmental groups urged California state agencies to make major changes before the next crab fishing season starts in the fall. The current crab season ends June 30. The coalition is led by the Center for Biological Diversity, Earthjustice and Oceana. One proposal to protect whales is to close fisheries where whales are feeding. Another is to use lines that break away when a trap catches on a whale. Even another idea is to increase efforts to collect lost and abandoned fishing gear that whales might get caught on. “It’s heartbreaking to know so many whales are getting tangled up in fishing gear,” said Catherine Kilduff, a lawyer with the Center for Biological Diversity. “They often drown or drag gear around until they are too exhausted to feed. Even more disturbing is that this problem is only getting worse.” Renzullo, the biologist from UC Davis, is not so sure. “My guess is that the number of whale entanglements will drop off as the year goes on,” she said. “About 90 percent of the crabs harvested are caught within six weeks of the season opening. Then the catch drops off.” Kevin Pinto has been harvesting Dungeness crabs off the coast of California for 36 years. He agrees that reforms are needed. Still, he suggested that environmental groups may be playing up the problem “to assure that humpback whales are not delisted” from the endangered species list. Rather than looking at humpback whales as one population, NOAA is proposing to look at humpbacks as 14 different groups. Ten of these groups, it suggests, no longer need to be listed as endangered. This includes some humpbacks that spend their winters off the coast of California. Thanks to protection efforts, humpback whales have seen their numbers steadily increase over the last 40 years. Yet, some environmental groups still believe they are in danger. “In our opinion, humpback whales still need federal protection,” Kilduff said. “Humpbacks off California are vulnerable to a wide range of threats." The threats include: pollution and trash, being struck by ships, and entanglement in fishing gear, she said. 