New technology helps researchers make better nighttime observations and devise conservation plans for the aquatic mammals On a Saturday night in April, Scott Kraus is getting ready to take out his boat from Sandwich, Massachusetts, to spend the evening on Cape Cod Bay. Kraus, vice president of research at the New England Aquarium, and his two-member crew are not out for a leisure sunset cruise. Instead, they are on a mission. They want to find out what North Atlantic right whales are doing at night. “It is like pulling an all-nighter in college,” says Kraus, who has been studying right whales for more than 35 years. He has loaded an arsenal of night-vision tools on the boat, including a high-resolution infrared camera, a light-intensifying scope and a low-light digital camera. The whales come to this region in late winter and early spring to feed. Scientists have studied the whales for years, but most of what they know about the whales' behavior comes from daylight observations. “Being out in a small boat amongst whales during the day is a lovely experience,” says Mark Baumgartner, an associate scientist at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. “Being out in a small boat trying to track a whale in darkness is slightly terrifying.” With only 500 remaining worldwide, the North Atlantic right whale population is considered endangered and faces multiple threats. Nearly 83 percent of the whales have become entangled with fishing equipment such as lobster gear at least once. Kraus has been experimenting with colored fishing rope that whales potentially could see better at night. “My concern is what these animals are seeing at night and what they are capable of avoiding,” he says. The lack of technology and the practical challenges explain why whales’ night life largely remains a mystery. Thermal-imaging technology may hold the answer, though, at least when it comes a whale's behavior at the surface. Thermal sensors can detect the blow from a whale as it surfaces to breathe. “A whale is this big engine that is well insulated on the outside,” says Wayne Perryman, a biologist with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. “As it is swimming along and generating heat, it takes in a breath of air and holds it in for a long time,” he says. “When it blows that air out, it is much warmer than the background, and we can see the difference.” The military has used infrared cameras for years, and in the early 1990s Perryman got the U.S. Navy to loan his team a thermal-imaging system to help count migrating gray whales off the California coast. Perryman found that the whales traveled faster at night during the second half of their migration and suggested that males and females without calves spent more time socializing during the day. Because people can actually see migrating whales only during the daytime, the overall population estimate may change if thermal-imaging systems are used to count more whales during the night. The early military instruments were expensive and unreliable, and required a refrigeration unit. Today, the technology is better and infrared cameras are commercially available at a fraction of the cost. They also offer higher resolution and are better adapted to field work. In 2014 Martin Stanley, a marine scientist from Ocean Life Survey, tested a thermal-imaging technique. It detects surfacing whales, which would allow large ships to avoid hitting them day and night. The study was carried out in the Hauraki Gulf off the east coast of New Zealand’s North Island, where 15 Bryde’s whales had been killed by ships between 2006 and 2012\. Stanley is investigating how these instruments can be installed on vessels to reduce collisions. Scientists have also used digital acoustic recording tags to understand underwater movements. These small tags are attached to whales with suction cups and typically stay on them for a few hours during the day. Over the years some scientists managed to leave a few tags on whales overnight and got surprising results. Ari Friedlaender is an ecologist with Oregon State University’s Marine Mammal Institute. In the waters off the West Antarctic Peninsula, Friedlaender found that humpback whales fed only at night, when krill swam into shallower water and were easier to catch. During the day, when krill were deeper and harder to get to, the humpbacks spent more time resting at the surface. In the Gulf of Maine, a team found that humpback whales made a special noise at night when feeding in the dark. The sound was similar to the ticking of a clock. Researchers believe this sound may act as a "dinner bell" for nearby whales listening for signs of a successful hunt. Off the coast of California, Friedlaender and his colleagues found that unlike the humpbacks, blue whales feed during the day and rest at night. Unsurprisingly, blue whales have also been struck and killed by ships. “It is probable that these animals are being struck when they are up near the surface, as they are in harm’s way at night and ships can’t see them,” Friedlaender says. This spring Baumgartner will test a brand-new tag on right whales in the Gulf of Maine that can stay on the animals for a longer period of time. “All whales are largely unknowable by us,” Kraus says. “What we are going to learn about whales at night is an extension of the kind of mystery that we are confronted with every day.”