Before Africa and Eurasia broke apart, sea levels and coastlines were different. The discovery of a whale fossil in an odd place points to major changes on Earth that led to upright humans. Scientists are excited about a whale that apparently took a wrong turn up an African river about 17 million years ago. They say it may offer clues to the climate-change forces that shaped human evolution, or how humans developed. The beak and jawbone of the 22-foot whale had been lost for 30 years. Now they help to show that an area called the East African Plateau probably began rising no earlier than 17 million years ago, according to a study. The area is known as the cradle of humankind. Major changes in the earth there are believed to be responsible for the gradual change of dense, humid forests into grasslands with fewer trees. The change favored evolving human ancestors that could walk upright on two feet. “The whale is telling us all kinds of things,” study co-author Louis Jacobs said. He studies the remains, or fossils, of animals and plants. The whale tells us when the plateau started rising, which Jacobs calls the "uplift that changed the climate that led to humans. It’s amazing.” Jacobs had been searching for the whale fossil since 1980. Back then he was head of paleontology at the National Museums of Kenya. The fossil was found in 1964 by James G. Mead, and Jacobs read about the discovery in a 1975 research paper. Every time Jacobs visited Harvard University, Washington or Kenya, he would try to find the fossil. “It was protected by a plaster jacket, so you couldn’t really see it,” he said. “I suspect nobody knew what it was. It was just kept in the collections there.” Finally, a collections official at Harvard located the fossil there in 2011, Jacobs said. Jacobs had the specimen scanned and analyzed. Then he contacted Henry Wichura, a scientist at the University of Potsdam in Germany. Wichura had been studying the plateau region, trying to determine when it started rising. He had found evidence that rivers and lava had flowed east from high points on the plateau at least 13 million years ago. What was missing for proof was evidence in the earth that showed when the uplift started, Wichura said. The difficulty in discovering when the earth started moving upward was due to the area being shaped by many different things. A hot spot in Earth’s mantle — the thick, middle layer of the earth — has been pushing up a wide area of East Africa. Meanwhile, cracks on plates surrounding the mantle have fractured the crust on which we live. That makes conditions bad for finding fossils in rocks. The researchers used original field notes from the discovery by Mead to pinpoint where and how high up the fossil had been found. The notes said the fossils were found more than 2,000 feet above modern sea level. Then researchers looked up incidents of whales swimming upriver from the sea. The river had to be large and had to rise gradually, Jacobs said. The whale would have had to swim a long way up, he said. No whale had swum to anywhere close to 2,000 feet high. The Antarctic minke whale took the longest known detour, more than 600 miles up the Amazon. Still, it only reached an elevation of little more than 3 feet above the Atlantic Ocean sea level. A humpback whale, named Humphrey, twice swam a more modest 82 miles up the Sacramento River in California. Freshwater dolphins have been found at elevations of more than 300 feet in Peru. Based on the sea level and shape of the African coast at the time, the whale would have traveled 372 to 559 miles from the Indian Ocean. It would have reached an elevation of 78 to 121 feet, according to the study. So, the area must have pushed up at least 1,935 feet since the whale's death to reach its present elevation of around 2,000 feet, the authors estimate. The whale bone was found in a thick layer of broken rocks beneath a lava flow that was 17 million years old, according to the study. Around it were mammal fossils from a period when Africa and Eurasia were attached. Fossil and geologic evidence show the uplift happened around the time when the local climate was slowly getting drier. The drying changed a humid forest into grasslands with more widely spaced trees. Scientists think that this kind of environmental pressure favored primates that could straighten their backs and walk longer distances on two feet. This eventually led to modern humans. The chances that one such modern human, Mead, would find a fossilized bone from a wandering marine mammal, buried under the desert, are astonishingly slim. “It’s an amazing thing,” Jacobs said. “But there it is.”