Crab-fishing poses problem for whales LOS ANGELES — In the Pacific waters off the coast of California, two groups are coming into conflict: crab fishermen and humpback whales. More and more whales have been injured or killed after getting trapped in fishing lines. In 2014, at least 30 whales were entangled in fishing lines. Most of them were grays and humpbacks. That’s a record number. It’s almost double the number of whales trapped in 2013. So far in 2015, at least 25 whales have been trapped in fishing lines. Crab fishermen drop traps to the sea floor. The traps are attached to buoys that float on the surface. Whales have been getting tangled in the lines that connect the traps and the buoys. Now, environmental groups are urging state officials to immediately change some fishing rules to protect whales. They are also pushing to keep the humpback whale on the endangered species list. It is the list of animals most likely to to die out forever, or become extinct. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) is a government agency that sets rules for oceans and fishing. In February, NOAA announced that it may remove some groups of humpback whales from the endangered species list. The number of humpback whales has risen over the last 40 years thanks to efforts to protect the huge marine mammals. The recent entanglements have put humpback whales back in the public eye. Jennifer Renzullo is a biologist at the University of California, Davis. She explained why more whales have been getting caught in fishing lines. “For some reason, humpback and gray whales that tend to migrate through areas such as Monterey Bay have been spending more time there,” Renzullo said. At the same time, the number of crabs was very high there this year. More fishing and more whales in the area are leading to more whales getting trapped, she said. Of the 30 whales tangled in fishing lines in 2014, seven died after the lines cut into their skin and blubber. Seven others were successfully released from the lines. It is not known what happened to the other whales that were caught up in lines. Fishing companies, government agencies and environmental groups have been working to protect whales. Last week though, three environmental groups joined together to call for immediate action. One idea they put forward is to stop fishing where whales are feeding. Another idea is to use lines that break away if whales get caught. The groups also said more efforts to collect lost or abandoned fishing gear could help. “It’s heartbreaking to know so many whales are getting tangled up in fishing gear,” said Catherine Kilduff, a lawyer with the Center for Biological Diversity — one group that is calling for action. “They often drown or drag gear around until they are too exhausted to feed. Even more disturbing is that this problem is only getting worse.” Renzullo, the biologist from UC Davis, is not so sure. “My guess is that the number of whale entanglements will drop off as the year goes on,” she said. Most crabs are caught within the first six weeks of the fishing season (the legal time of year for crab fishing), she said. As fishing drops off later in the season, so could the number of whales getting trapped, she said. Yet environmental groups say humpback whales are still in danger. “In our opinion, humpback whales still need federal protection,” Kilduff said. She said humpbacks off California still face "a wide range of threats." The threats to whales include: pollution and trash, getting hit by ships, or getting tangled in fishing gear, she said. 