Icelanders have been hunting whales for centuries, but now there is a growing demand by tourists to see the animals alive Iceland's whales have often ended up as meat on a plate. Today, though times are changing.  Whales are now the stars of a strong tourism scene. Visitors have been going to the island country to see them, not to eat them. Boats take groups of people out for whale watching. Sometimes, only part of a tail is visible. It is still enough to make people say "oooh" and "ahhh" in joy. Joachim Holm is a visitor from Sweden. He said he wanted to look for whales. They do not get many chances to see live whales, he said.  Animal rights workers say that the boats bother the whales. Still, they say that it is better to bother them than to kill them. ## Tradition Versus Green Tourism Many people go to Iceland to watch whales. There are many more people doing that now than 10 years ago.  Minke whales are one kind of whale.  Iceland allows hunting of minke whales. They are not endangered, or close to dying out. The number of minkes is about 32,000.  Minke whales are hunted in Faxafloi Bay. It is happening in the same waters where the whale watchers go.  Iceland started whale hunting again in 2003\. It went against a 1986 worldwide rule. Norway did this, too. Japan also allows the hunting. Officially, the country says it hunts whales for science. Still, much of the whale meat is sold in stores. Fin whales are another kind of whale. Iceland stopped fin whale hunting last year. The fin whale is listed as endangered. There are less than half as many as there used to be. ## Whales On The Menu Icelanders do not eat much whale meat anymore. The country's whale hunt is mainly for tourists. Many people are expected to visit the island this year. Hunters have not gotten as many whales lately. They blame poor weather and warmer waters. The whales are following mackerel fish, which are their main food. They are going closer to Greenland. The water is colder there. IP-Utgerd Ltd. is an Icelandic company that hunts minkes. The company killed 17 whales in 2017\. That number is down from 46 in 2016.  The restaurant Thrir Frakkar serves whale meat.  Asian tourists enjoy it most. Stefan Ulfarsson is the cook at Thrir Frakkar. He said some Asian visitors are used to whale meat. Sarah Krieger is a tourist from Florida. She does not mind eating whale meat, as long as there are enough whales, she said.