A geological mystery is close to being solved, thanks to a whale's upriver swim 17 million years ago. The location where the fossil had been excavated holds clues to early climate change. A whale that apparently took a wrong turn up an African river about 17 million years ago may offer clues to the climate-change forces that shaped human evolution. Lost for more than 30 years, the fossilized beak and jaw bone of the 22-foot whale helps to determine that the East African Plateau probably began rising no earlier than 17 million years ago, according to a study. The report was published in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. That geologic upheaval in an area known as the cradle of humankind is believed to be responsible for the gradual change of dense, humid forests into grasslands with fewer trees. The change made it advantageous to evolving human ancestors to walk standing up. “The whale is telling us all kinds of things,” said study co-author Louis Jacobs, a paleontologist at Southern Methodist University in Dallas. “It tells us the starting point for all that uplift that changed the climate that led to humans. It’s amazing.” Jacobs had been searching for the specimen since 1980, when he was head of paleontology at the National Museums of Kenya. He had read about the 1964 find by James G. Mead in a 1975 research paper. Every time Jacobs visited Harvard University, Washington or Nairobi, he would try to find it. “It was protected by a plaster jacket, so you couldn’t really see it,” he said. “I suspect nobody knew what it was. It was just kept in the collections there.” Finally, just before another trip to Kenya in 2011, a collections official at Harvard located the fossil there, Jacobs said. Jacobs had the specimen scanned and analyzed. Then he contacted Henry Wichura, a structural geologist at the University of Potsdam in Germany. Wichura had been studying the plateau region, trying to determine when it started rising. He had found evidence that rivers and lava had flowed east from high points on the plateau at least 13 million years ago. “What was missing was geological evidence of the onset” of uplift, Wichura said. That’s because the area is shaped by multiple forces. A hot spot in Earth’s mantle has been pushing up a wide area of East Africa. The mantle — the thick, middle layer of the Earth — surrounds the planet's superhot core. Meanwhile, moving tectonic plates have been fracturing the crust, on which we live. That makes for bad conditions for fossils in sedimentary rocks. The researchers used Mead’s original field notes to pinpoint where the fossil had been excavated, and at what elevation — more than 2,000 feet above modern sea level. Then they looked up incidents of whales swimming upriver from the sea. The river had to be large and it had to rise gradually, Jacobs said. The whale would have had to swim a long way up, he said. No whale had swum to anywhere close to such an elevation. Even the Antarctic minke whale that took the longest known detour, more than 600 miles up the Amazon, reached an elevation of little more than 3 feet above the Atlantic Ocean sea level. A humpback whale, dubbed Humphrey, twice swam a more modest 82 miles up the Sacramento River in California. Freshwater dolphins have been found at elevations of more than 300 feet in Peru. Based on the sea level and shape of the African coast at the time, the whale would have traveled 372 to 559 miles from the Indian Ocean, bringing it to an elevation of 78 to 121 feet, according to the study. So the area must have been pushed up at least 1,935 feet since the whale died to reach its present elevation, the authors estimate. The whale bone was found in a thick layer of debris beneath a lava flow dated to 17 million years old, according to the study. Around it were mammal fossils that date to a period when Africa and Eurasia were joined. Fossil and geologic evidence show the uplift happened around the same time as a long-term drying of the local climate. The drying changed a humid forest into grasslands with more widely spaced trees. Scientists theorize that this kind of environmental pressure favored primates that could straighten their backs and walk longer distances on two feet. This eventually led to modern humans. The chances that one such modern human, Mead, would find a fossilized bone from an errant, lost marine mammal, buried under the desert, are astonishingly slim. “It’s an amazing thing,” Jacobs said. “But there it is.”