New technology helps researchers make better nighttime observations and devise conservation plans for the aquatic mammals On a Saturday night in April, Scott Kraus is getting ready to take out his boat from Sandwich, Massachusetts. He and his crew will spend the evening on Cape Cod Bay. Kraus is the vice president of research at the New England Aquarium and has studied right whales for more than 35 years. He and his crew are on a mission. They have loaded an arsenal of night-vision tools on the boat. These tools include an infrared camera that uses heat to make images, a light-intensifying scope and a low-light camera. They want to find out what North Atlantic right whales are doing at night. The whales come to this region in late winter and early spring to feed. Scientists have studied the whales for years. Most of what they know about their behavior comes from watching them during the day. “Being out in a small boat amongst whales during the day is a lovely experience,” says Mark Baumgartner. He is a scientist at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Massachusetts. “Being out in a small boat trying to track a whale in darkness is slightly terrifying.” With only 500 remaining worldwide, the North Atlantic right whale is endangered and faces multiple threats. Nearly 83 percent of the whales have become entangled in fishing equipment at least once. Kraus has been experimenting with colored fishing rope that whales may be able to better see at night. “My concern is what these animals are seeing at night and what they are capable of avoiding,” he says. The whales’ night life remains a mystery. Heat-imaging technology may hold at least part of the answer, though. Heat sensors can detect when a whale blows out air as it comes to the surface to breathe. “A whale is this big engine that is well insulated on the outside,” says Wayne Perryman. He is a biologist with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. “As it is swimming along and generating heat, it takes in a breath of air and holds it in for a long time,” he says. “When it blows that air out, it is much warmer than the background, and we can see the difference.” The military has used infrared cameras for years. In the early 1990s, Perryman got the U.S. Navy to loan his team a thermal-imaging system to help count gray whales off the California coast. Perryman found that the whales traveled faster at night during the second half of their migration. He suggested that males and females without calves spent more time socializing during the day, so they moved more slowly. Because people can actually count whales only during the daytime, the overall population estimate may change if heat-sensing cameras are used at night. The early military instruments were expensive. They also were not reliable and needed to be kept cold. Today, the technology is much better and infrared cameras cost a fraction of their original price. In 2014 Martin Stanley, a marine scientist from Ocean Life Survey, tested a thermal-imaging device. He is trying to find a way to detect surfacing whales at night. The study was carried out in the Hauraki Gulf near New Zealand’s North Island. Between 2006 and 2012, 15 Bryde’s whales were killed there after they were hit by ships. Stanley is investigating how these instruments can be installed on boats to reduce nighttime collisions with whales. Scientists have also used digital sound recording tags to understand underwater movements. These tags typically stay on the whales for a few hours during the day. Over the years, some scientists managed to leave a few tags on whales overnight. They got surprising results. Ari Friedlaender is an ecologist with Oregon State University’s Marine Mammal Institute. In waters off the West Antarctic Peninsula, Friedlaender found that humpback whales fed only at night, when krill swam into shallower water and were easier to catch. During the day, when krill were deeper and harder to get to, the humpbacks spent more time resting at the surface. In the Gulf of Maine, a team found that humpback whales made a special noise similar to the ticking of a clock when they were bottom-feeding in the dark. Researchers believe this sound may act as a "dinner bell." It tells other whales that there is food nearby. Off the coast of California, Friedlaender and other scientists found that blue whales are different. They feed during the day and rest at night. Unsurprisingly, blue whales have also been struck by ships. “It is probable that these animals are being struck when they are up near the surface, as they are in harm’s way at night and ships can’t see them,” Friedlaender says. This spring Baumgartner will test a new type of sound tag on right whales in the Gulf of Maine. It can stay on the animals for a longer period of time. “All whales are largely unknowable by us,” Kraus says. “What we are going to learn about whales at night is an extension of the kind of mystery that we are confronted with every day.”