Icelanders have been hunting whales for centuries, but now there is a growing demand by tourists to see the animals alive Iceland's whales have traditionally ended up as steaks on a plate. The country used to eat whale meat. But times are changing, and whales are now the stars of a growing ecotourism scene as visitors stream to the North Atlantic island. "Minke whale at two o'clock, about 200 meters out!" shouts Spanish tour guide Alberto Alejandro, microphone in hand. He is onboard as a boat of whale watchers cruises slowly up the coast. The sighting is fleeting. Only the tail fin is visible when the whale resurfaces for air, but it's enough to take the 60 passengers' breath away as they "oooh" and "ahhh" in joy. "It's one of the things we absolutely wanted to do on our first trip here," says Joachim Holm, a Swedish tourist. "We don't get many opportunities to see live whales." Animal rights activists say that whale-watching boats disturb the majestic mammals in their natural habitat. However, they concede that it is still better to pester the whales than to slaughter them for food. In Husavik Bay and Faxafloi Bay, more than 355,000 people went whale watching in 2016. That's an increase of 30 percent over 2015 and four times more than a decade ago. Whale-watching boats navigate regularly through Faxafloi Bay, in the same waters where minke whales are hunted. Iceland resumed whaling, or whale-hunting, in 2003, turning its back, along with Norway, on a 1986 international moratorium. Japan also allows whaling. Officially, the country says it is for scientific reasons. However, a large share of whale meat ends up being sold in stores. Iceland allows hunting of minke whales, which are not an endangered species, and one whose stocks are estimated at around 32,000\. The population is considered stable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. Iceland suspended its fin whale hunt last year after Japan, a country that buys much of Iceland's whale meat, introduced restrictive regulations. Second in size only to blue whales, the fin whale has been listed as an endangered species since 1996\. Its worldwide population has declined by more than 70 percent since 1929. Alessandro Rosa is an Italian tourist. He said he respected Iceland's whaling traditions, which have been a part of life here since the 13th century. But, he added, "I've never eaten whale meat and I don't intend to taste it." Icelanders themselves consume little whale meat today. The country's whale hunt is primarily aimed at satisfying demand from tourists, with more than 2 million people expected to visit the island this year. Whalers have in recent years failed to meet their quota of kills typically around 200. They blame poor weather and warmer waters. The warmth is pushing the whales to follow the mackerel, their main source of food, closer to Greenland, where the water is colder. IP-Utgerd Ltd., an Icelandic company specializing in hunting minkes, harpooned 17 whales in 2017, down from 46 in 2016 and 52 in 2012\. A record 81 were killed in 2009, and this year's quota was 224. In Reykjavik, the restaurant Thrir Frakkar has offered whale meat on its menu since it opened in 1989. Asian tourists are those who are most keen on it. "They're more used to whale meat; it's more a part of their culture," said the restaurant's chef, Stefan Ulfarsson. Sarah Krieger is a tourist from Florida. She does not object to eating whale meat as long as stocks are managed "responsibly." "Humans are at the top of the food chain," she said. Together, whale hunting and whale watching reel in revenues of about 100 million euros ($117 million) a year for Iceland.  According to the Ice Whale Association, whale watching is believed to bring in about 23 million euros ($28.5 million) per year.  Whale hunting remains a profitable business, industry experts say. There have been an average of 43 kills per year since 2003. The price of whale meat has more than doubled in 10 years to 20 euros ($24) per kilogram. It now costs more than chicken and pork. A kilogram is just over 2 pounds.  Yet tourists to Iceland are eating less whale meat than before. In 2016, only about 12 percent of tourists said they tasted whale meat during their visit, compared to 40 percent in 2009\. Those numbers come from studies by the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW). The head of the Icelandic branch of IFAW, Sigursteinn Masson, said attitudes were changing and he expected to see whaling end soon. But Gunnar Bergmann Jonsson, the head of whale-hunting company IP-Utgerd Ltd., disagreed. He sees no need to end the practice as long as minke numbers remain strong and it's not an endangered species.