The more you eat, the more you grow The blue whale is massive. It is as long as an airplane. Its heart is the size of a car. The blue whale's tongue weighs as much as an elephant. Blue whales are part of the baleen whale group, the largest animals on the planet. Now, scientists say they might know why they have become so large. Some whales are more than 32 feet in length, but scientists say they probably started out being only 6 to 10 feet long. “We think of [baleen whales] as being giants," said Graham Slater, a scientist who helped write the research. Baleen whales have existed for 36 million years. Yet, they have only been giants for a small part of this time. ## Figuring Out When Gigantism Kicked In Slater and other scientists wanted to determine what made the whales longer over time. So, they studied the lengths of 63 baleen whales. They used measurements from skulls of whales. They also looked at the lengths of 13 living species of whales. Then, they looked at the whale family tree. Next, this information was put into a series of computer models. These models used math to help scientists examine how and when the whales became so much bigger. This trait of massive size is called gigantism. Scientists think gigantism affected several different types of whales. They found that it was not just the largest whales that became bigger over time. The smallest whales alive today are also much larger than the smallest whales from long ago. It seems that baleen whales had been gradually changing in size for 30 million years. A big change began to take place between 4.5 million and a few hundred thousand years ago. ## Water Movement Was The Reason The recent timing rules out the possibility that gigantism was caused by certain things, such as giant sharks, the scientists said. It also rules out that the gigantism was a response to oceans around the world becoming colder. Instead, scientists think gigantism was probably because of water movement. Cold, nutrient-rich water was pushed to where the whales lived about 3 million years ago. This caused a lot of sea life to live in clusters instead of being spread out. In time, this made the whales bigger. “The bigger your mouth, the more you can take in and the less energy it costs you to do it,” Slater said. ## Ocean Temperatures Will Affect Whales Olivier Lambert is also a scientist. He was not involved in the study but said the research makes sense for one of the last stages in the evolution of size among baleen whales. However, he said other things could also have caused the whales to evolve. These may have taken place earlier in the whales' evolution. These things could have involved large sharks or changes in ocean temperature. Lambert believes the latest research is important to understanding what is happening now. Today, the future is unsure for baleen whales. They are threatened by changes in the ocean's temperatures. The temperature changes affect the whales' environment. They can cause its prey to die out. Slater agrees.  “If climate change does go the route we think it is going, it is going to spell real bad news for these big baleen whales,” he said.