Crab-fishing poses a whale of a problem LOS ANGELES — Off the coast of California, two groups are fishing the same waters: crab fisherman and whales. It has been causing problems for the whales. So far this year, 25 whales have been trapped in fishing lines. In 2014, at least 30 whales became trapped. That's almost twice as many as in 2013. It is mostly gray whales and humpbacks that get tangled in fishing lines. Crab fishermen drop traps to the sea floor. The traps are attached to buoys. The buoys float on the ocean's surface. Whales can get tangled in the lines that connect the traps and the buoys. Of the 30 whales tangled in 2014, seven died. Another seven were freed from the lines. No one knows what happened to the other whales. Jennifer Renzullo is a scientist at the University of California. She explained why more whales have become tangled. “Humpback and gray whales that tend to migrate through areas such as Monterey Bay have been spending more time there,” Renzullo said. At the same time, the number of crabs was very high there this year. There is more fishing and more whales in the area. It leads to more whales getting trapped, she said. Now, environmental groups are calling for immediate changes to protect whales. They also want to keep the humpback whale on the endangered species list. It is the list of the animals most likely to disappear forever. One idea to protect whales from crab-fishing is to stop fishing where whales are feeding. Another idea is to use lines that break if whales get caught. Also, fishing gear left in the water could be collected. Then whales might not get caught in it. Catherine Kilduff is a lawyer with the Center for Biological Diversity. Her group wants more protection for whales. Whales getting caught in fishing gear is "heartbreaking," she said. They can drown or become too tired to eat. "This problem is only getting worse," she added. Renzullo from University of California is not so worried. She thinks the number of whale entanglements will drop off "as the year goes on.” Most of the fishing happens at the beginning of crab season, she said. After that, less fishing is done. That could mean fewer whales would be trapped in lines. The number of humpback whales has risen over the last 40 years. Steps to protect the whales have helped. Still, environmental groups say whales face many dangers. Pollution, trash, ships and fishing lines are just some of these, Kilduff said. Humpback whales still need to be protected by the government, Kilduff said. He said the whales face "a wide range of threats."