New technology helps researchers make better nighttime observations and devise conservation plans for the aquatic mammals On a Saturday night in April, Scott Kraus is getting ready to take out his boat. He and his crew are loading equipment that will help them see in the dark. They will spend the evening on Cape Cod Bay. Kraus works for New England Aquarium in Boston, Massachusetts. For more than 35 years, he has studied a kind of whale called the right whale. He and his crew are on a mission. They want to find out what North Atlantic right whales are doing at night. The whales come to this area in late winter and early spring to feed. Scientists have studied the whales for years. Most of what they know about their behavior comes from watching them during the day. It is a lovely experience to be out among whales during the day, says Mark Baumgartner. He is a scientist at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. “Being out in a small boat trying to track a whale in darkness is slightly terrifying.” There are only 500 North Atlantic right whales in the world. The species is endangered and faces many threats. About four out of five whales have become caught in fishing equipment at least once. Kraus has been experimenting with colored fishing rope. He hopes it will be easier for whales to see at night. “My concern is what these animals are seeing at night and what they are capable of avoiding,” he says. What whales do at night is a mystery to scientists. Heat-imaging technology may hold at least part of the answer. This equipment can show a whale blowing out air as it surfaces to breathe, said Wayne Perryman. He is a scientist with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The whale "takes in a breath of air and holds it in for a long time,” Perryman says. “When it blows that air out, it is much warmer than the background, and we can see the difference.” The military has used these cameras for years. In the early 1990s, the U.S. Navy loaned Perryman a system to count migrating gray whales. Perryman found that the whales traveled faster at night. He suggested that males and females without calves spent more time together during the day. If heat-imaging cameras are used, scientists may get a better idea of how many whales there are in the world. The early devices were expensive. They also were not reliable and needed to be kept cold. Today, the cameras are much better and cost much less. Martin Stanley works for Ocean Life Survey as a marine scientist. Ocean Life Survey studies sea life around the world. In 2014, Stanley did a study in the Hauraki Gulf near New Zealand’s North Island. Between 2006 and 2012, 15 Bryde’s whales were killed after they were hit by ships. Stanley wants to find a way to put the heat cameras onto the ships to prevent whales from getting hit. Scientists have also used sound recording tags to understand how whales move under water. These tags usually stay on the whales for a few hours during the day. Over the years, a few tags were left on overnight. The scientists got surprising results. In the Gulf of Maine, a team found that humpback whales make a special noise. It sounds like the ticking of a clock. The whales make the sound when they eat on the bottom of the ocean in the dark. Scientists thinks this sound works like a "dinner bell." Nearby whales listen for it and know that food is close by. This spring, Baumgartner will test a new type of sound tag on right whales in the Gulf of Maine. It can stay on the animals for a longer period of time. “All whales are largely unknowable by us,” Kraus says. “What we are going to learn about whales at night" is the second half the mystery.