Honey Money WASHINGTON, D.C. — In Mozambique's woodlands, you can hear the sound of sweet evolution at work. Mozambique is a country in Africa. Over hundreds of years, people and wild birds called honeyguides have learned to work together to find honey. They do it with a simple sound: "Brrr-hm." When people want honey, they make that sound and the honeyguides fly to hidden bees' nests. People follow the birds and find the honey. Scientists studied the sound to see if it really worked. They learned that it did. They compared it with other sounds. Scientists found that when the honeyguides heard "brrr-hm," they went to the nests a lot more. When you make the right noise, you can get much more honey than when you make the wrong noise. "It's an exchange of information for skills," said Claire Spottiswoode, a scientist who studied the sound. It happened to her. She was unable to find nests until her friend made the correct noise and was led to honey. She tasted it and said the honey was "very rich, very flavorful. It catches at the back of the throat." The honeyguide is very good at finding bees' nests. Scientists are not quite sure why, but it probably has to do with a super sense of smell, Spottiswoode said. Still, there is a problem. These nests are stuck in trees that are difficult for the birds to reach. Even worse, the bees will protect their nests by stinging the birds, sometimes killing them. People who live in the region are called the Yao. They make a living on the honey. They have axes and other tools to reach those nests. They also use smoke to chase the bees away. They want to keep bees from stinging the birds. It is tough for people to find the hidden bees. Over the years, the honeyguide and the Yao have come up with the "brrr-hm" bird call. When honeyguides hear it they get noisy. They fly from tree to tree and people follow them. The birds stop when they find a nest. The hunters then open the tree, smoke out the bees and collect the honey. The birds eat the wax, Spottiswoode said. While people can train dogs and other animals to hunt, this is different. Those animals are pets. The honeyguides are wild birds that are not trained by people, Spottiswoode said. In the country of Tanzania, the honeyguides also help people find honey. There, the birds and people work together using a different sound, she said. Although the honeyguides are helpful and have a sweet name, they can be mean. The honeyguides will put their eggs in the nests of other birds. When the baby honeyguide hatches, it kills the other baby birds with its beak that has a hook at the end.