The wildfire destroyed areas that are home to the great gray owl, the Sierra Nevada red fox, the Pacific fisher and the black-backed woodpecker. GROVELAND, Calif. — A wildfire burned a huge area of the Sierra Nevada forests last summer. It was called the Rim Fire. But it did more than hurt the trees. California's rarest animals live in the forests. The wildfire made big changes to their homes. That could be a problem for the animals: the great gray owl, the Sierra Nevada red fox and the Pacific fisher. The fire hit the Stanislaus National Forest and Yosemite National Park. It burned 257,000 acres. The area houses a group of roughly 200 great gray owls. The owls cannot be found anywhere else. The blaze also came within 12 miles of 10 pairs of the red fox. The foxes are breeding. Their young could keep the animals around for future generations. The Sierra Nevada red fox lives in the mountains. It is barely surviving. Scientists feared that coyotes that were trying to escape the fire could have eaten the foxes. U.S. scientists are also concerned about the loss of the possible home for the Pacific fisher. The animal is a member of the weasel family. There are about 500 of them. They live in dense old-growth forests south of Yosemite’s Merced River. “In the Rim fire, only birds that could fly the farthest and animals that could run the fastest survived,” said John Buckley. He works for an environmental group. “It killed squirrels and bears." That could be especially bad for animals that only have a small number left, he said. Biologists do not know how much the fire hurt wildlife, yet. They have not been allowed into severely burned areas. It is not safe for them to go there. It might not be for more than a year. Even without that information, the government is coming up with ideas to help protect the animals. These include planting new trees. There may also be some logging. The idea is to save certain species from being wiped out. That effort was interrupted for more than two weeks this month, though. Federal wildlife biologists could not work during the government shutdown. The blaze also looks like it hit dozens of areas where spotted owls and great grey owls nest. Great grey owls are the largest owls in North America. They are 2 feet tall and have a 5-foot wingspan. Their faces have large circles of feathers and piercing yellow eyes. Roy Bridgman is a wildlife biologist for the Stanislaus National Forest. He said he “visited a great owl nest that had been around for 20 years and it was collapsed." There are not a lot of great grey owls. Any loss is a big deal, he said. But John Keane found a reason to be positive about 10 miles west of Yosemite. Keane is a government scientist who has studied great gray owls there for 15 years. The fire spared meadows there. “If I had to put money on it, I’d say there are still owls here,” Keane said. Local groups of bears, deer and other common animals are expected to recover. But it is not clear what will happen to the black-backed woodpecker. The woodpecker is important in the forest. It will help other animals live. It creates holes for animals like Western bluebirds and squirrels to nest in, environmentalists say. It is also threatened by taking out the burned trees. Those competing interests are already playing out on mountain slopes that were hit by the fire. Above, the woodpeckers were feasting on beetles. The insects began swarming dead trees while they were still smoking. Below, crews were clearing trees away with chain saws and big-rig trucks. “We’re looking for silver linings,” Bridgman said with a sigh. “But we’re caught between extremes.”