The blaze that burned 257,000 acres of High Sierra wilderness severely altered the home of the great gray owl, Sierra Nevada red fox and Pacific fisher. GROVELAND, Calif. — The Rim Fire last summer burned a huge area of the Sierra Nevada forests. But it did more than that. The wildfire also severely changed the area that houses California’s rarest animals: the great gray owl, the Sierra Nevada red fox and the Pacific fisher. The fire burned 257,000 acres of High Sierra wilderness in the Stanislaus National Forest and Yosemite National Park. It houses a group of roughly 200 great gray owls that cannot be found anywhere else. The blaze also came within 12 miles of 10 pairs of the red fox. The foxes are breeding. Their young could save the animals for future generations. The Sierra Nevada red fox is a particular type, or subspecies, of the animal. It is barely surviving above the tree line. Scientists feared the foxes could have been eaten by coyotes trying to escape the smoke and flames. Scientists actually thought the foxes were wiped out 90 years ago. They only found the foxes again in 2010. The foxes are now being considered for special protection. Federal wildlife scientists are also concerned about the loss of the possible home for the Pacific fisher. The animal is a member of the weasel family. There are about 500 of them. They live in dense old-growth forests south of Yosemite’s Merced River. They are also being considered for protection. “In the Rim Fire, only birds that could fly the farthest and animals that could run the fastest survived,” said John Buckley. He works at the nonprofit Central Sierra Environmental Resource Center. “It killed squirrels and bears." The wildfire could be especially bad for animals that only have a small number left, he said. Biologists do not know how much the fire hurt wildlife, yet. They have not been allowed into severely burned areas. Those areas could remain closed for more than a year for safety reasons, forest officials said. Even without that information, federal agencies are coming up with ideas to help protect the animals. These include planting new trees. There may also be some logging. The idea is to save certain species from [extinction](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species). That effort was interrupted for more than two weeks this month, though. Federal wildlife biologists could not work during the government shutdown. Early reports said that the blaze hit dozens of areas where spotted owls, goshawks and great grey owls nest. Great grey owls are the largest owls in North America. They stand 2 feet tall and have a 5-foot wingspan. Their faces have large disks and piercing yellow eyes. Roy Bridgman is a wildlife biologist for the Stanislaus National Forest. He said he “visited a great owl nest that had been around for 20 years and it was collapsed. For a species with a tiny population, any loss at all is a big hit.” But John Keane, a U.S. Forest Service research wildlife ecologist, found a reason for cautious optimism about 10 miles west of Yosemite. He has studied great gray owls there for 15 years. Meadows there were spared by the fire. “If I had to put money on it, I’d say there are still owls here,” Keane said. Animals continue searching for food and shelter. One person said they look in “patches of green, wherever they can find them.” It was two months after the fire. Lill Mcleod is general store manager at Camp Mather. The tourist area is about a mile away from the meadowlands patrolled by great gray owls. Mcleod said, “Starving animals including countless bobcats and at least four mountain lions have been coming after the squirrels and chipmunks in the camp.” She said she was heartbroken by horribly injured bear found near the road. "He couldn’t see or hear or smell because his head was so badly burned," she said. "He had a broken paw and kept wiping his face in the dirt.” That bear was put down by California wildlife officials. So was an injured cub. Three other adult bears were found dead nearby, Mcleod said. Local populations of bears, deer and other common animals are expected to live. But prospects for the black-backed woodpecker remain uncertain. The woodpecker is important to help other animals survive after the fire. It creates nesting holes for animals like Western bluebirds and squirrels, environmentalists say. It is also threatened by the salvaging of burned trees. Those competing interests are already playing out on fire-stripped slopes. Above, the woodpeckers were feasting on wood-boring beetles. The insects began swarming dead trees while they were still smoking. Crews below with chain saws and big-rig trucks were picking up fallen tree branches and trunks from roads and paths made for power lines. “We’re looking for silver linings,” Bridgman said with a sigh. “But we’re caught between extremes.”