The great gray owl, the Sierra Nevada red fox and the Pacific Fisher saw their home in the Sierra Nevada forests severely altered by the big blaze. GROVELAND, Calif. — The Rim Fire last summer did more than just scorch a huge area of Sierra Nevada forests. The wildfire also severely changed the area that houses California’s rarest animals: the great gray owl, the Sierra Nevada red fox and the Pacific fisher. The fire burned 257,000 acres of High Sierra wilderness straddling the Stanislaus National Forest and Yosemite National Park. The area houses a clan of roughly 200 great gray owls that cannot be found anywhere else. The blaze also came within 12 miles of 10 breeding pairs of the red fox. The Sierra Nevada red fox is a particular type, or subspecies, of the animal. It is barely surviving in the cold, steep slopes above the tree line. Scientists feared the foxes could have been eaten by coyotes trying to escape the smoke and flames. The foxes' existence was confirmed in 2010. The were actually thought to have been wiped out in the 1920s. They are being considered for listing under the federal Endangered Species Act. Such a listing would provide the foxes with special protections. Federal wildlife biologists are also concerned about the loss of the possible home for the Pacific fisher, a member of the weasel family. There are about 500 Pacific fishers. They live in dense old-growth forests south of Yosemite’s Merced River. They are also being considered for federal listing. “In the Rim Fire, only birds that could fly the farthest and animals that could run the fastest survived,” said John Buckley. He is executive director of the nonprofit Central Sierra Environmental Resource Center. “It killed squirrels and bears. For animals of which only a handful exist, it could be especially tragic.” Biologists do not know how much the fire hurt wildlife, yet. They have not been allowed into severely burned areas. Those areas could remain closed for more than a year for safety reasons, federal forest officials said. Even without that information, federal agencies are coming up with ideas to help protect the animals. These include planting new trees. There may also be some logging. The idea is to save certain species from [extinction](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species). That effort was interrupted for more than two weeks this month, though. Federal wildlife biologists could not work during the government shutdown. Early reports indicated that the blaze destroyed or damaged dozens of areas where spotted owls, goshawks and great grey owls nest. Great grey owls are the largest owls in North America. They stand 2 feet tall and have a 5-foot wingspan. Their faces have large disks and piercing yellow eyes. Roy Bridgman is a wildlife biologist for the Stanislaus National Forest. He said he “visited a great owl nest that had been around for 20 years and it was collapsed. For a species with a tiny population, any loss at all is a big hit.” On a recent weekday, however, John Keane, a U.S. Forest Service research wildlife ecologist, found a reason for some optimism about 10 miles west of Yosemite. He has studied great gray owls there for 15 years. Meadows there, edged with 80-foot-tall cedars and ponderosa pines, were spared by the fire. Peering through binoculars, Keane said, “If I had to put money on it, I’d say there are still owls here.” Future research will help determine whether enough of the owls survived to keep the species alive. Animals continue searching for food and shelter in, as one resident put it, “patches of green, wherever they can find them.” It was two months after the great fire raged. Lill Mcleod is general store manager at Camp Mather, a tourist destination about a mile away from the meadowlands patrolled by great gray owls. Mcleod said, “Starving animals including countless bobcats and at least four mountain lions have been coming after the squirrels and chipmunks in the camp.” "The heartbreaker," she added, was a horribly injured, starving bear "we found staggering along a road here. He couldn’t see or hear or smell because his head was so badly burned. He had a broken paw and kept wiping his face in the dirt." That bear was put down by California Department of Fish and Wildlife game wardens. So was an injured cub. Three other adult bears were found dead nearby, Mcleod said. Local populations of bears, deer and other common animals are expected to recover. But prospects for the black-backed woodpecker remain uncertain. The woodpecker is being considered for listing under the California Endangered Species Act. The woodpecker plays a key role in post-fire forest ecology. It creates nesting holes for other birds and mammals such as Western bluebirds and squirrels, environmentalists say. It is also threatened by the salvaging of burned trees. Those competing interests were already playing out on fire-stripped slopes. Above, the woodpeckers were feasting on wood-boring beetles that began swarming dead trees while they were still smoking. Below, crews with chain saws and big-rig trucks were removing barriers and salvaging fallen tree trunks from roads and paths created for power lines. “We’re looking for silver linings,” Bridgman said with a sigh. “But we’re caught between extremes.”