The blaze destroyed or damaged dozens of nesting and roosting areas for spotted owls, goshawks and great gray owls. There are worries about the Sierra Nevada red fox. GROVELAND, Calif. — The Rim Fire that scorched a huge swath of Sierra Nevada forests last summer also severely changed the habitat of California’s rarest animals: the great gray owl, the Sierra Nevada red fox and the Pacific fisher. The fire burned 257,000 acres of High Sierra wilderness straddling the Stanislaus National Forest and Yosemite National Park. It houses a geographically isolated and genetically distinct clan of roughly 200 great gray owls. The blaze also came within 12 miles of 10 breeding pairs of the subspecies of red fox clinging to survival in the cold, steep slopes above the tree line. Scientists feared the foxes could have been eaten by coyotes trying to escape the smoke and flames. The foxes' existence was confirmed in 2010. They were actually thought to have been wiped out in the 1920s. The foxes are being considered for listing under the federal Endangered Species Act. Federal wildlife biologists are also concerned about the loss of potential habitat for the Pacific fisher, which belongs to the weasel family. The Pacific fishers are members of an isolated Southern Sierra group of about 500 individuals. They live in dense old-growth forests south of Yosemite’s Merced River. They are also under consideration for federal listing. “In the Rim Fire, only birds that could fly the farthest and animals that could run the fastest survived,” said John Buckley, executive director of the nonprofit Central Sierra Environmental Resource Center. “It killed squirrels and bears. For animals of which only a handful exist, it could be especially tragic.” The exact toll on wildlife will not be known until biologists are allowed to survey severely burned areas. Those areas could remain closed for more than a year for safety reasons, federal forest officials said. Even without that information, federal agencies are developing post-fire management strategies. These include reforestation and salvage logging projects to protect certain species from [extinction](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species). That effort was interrupted by the federal government shutdown, which furloughed federal wildlife biologists. Preliminary reports from the fire area indicated that the blaze destroyed or damaged dozens of nesting and roosting areas for spotted owls, goshawks and great gray owls — the largest owl in North America. They stand 2 feet tall and have a 5-foot wingspan, with piercing yellow eyes accented by large facial disks. Roy Bridgman, wildlife biologist for the Stanislaus National Forest, said he “visited a great owl nest that had been around for 20 years and it was collapsed. For a species with a tiny population, any loss at all is a big hit.” On a recent weekday, however, John Keane, a U.S. Forest Service research wildlife ecologist, found a reason for some optimism about 10 miles west of Yosemite where he has studied great gray owls for 15 years. Meadows there, edged with 80-foot-tall cedars and ponderosa pines, were spared by the fire, which began burning in August. Peering through binoculars and methodically scanning the treetops, Keane said, “If I had to put money on it, I’d say there are still owls here.” Future research will help determine whether enough of the owls survived in the region to sustain the state-endangered raptor. Two months after the fire raged across one of the wildest areas in the state, animals continue searching for food and shelter in, as one resident put it, “patches of green, wherever they can find them.” Lill Mcleod is general store manager at Camp Mather, a tourist destination about a mile away from the meadowlands patrolled by great gray owls. Mcleod said, “Starving animals including countless bobcats and at least four mountain lions have been coming after the squirrels and chipmunks in the camp.” “The heartbreaker,” she added, “was a horribly injured, emaciated bear we found staggering along a road here. He couldn’t see or hear or smell because his head was so badly burned. He had a broken paw and kept wiping his face in the dirt.” That bear was euthanized by California Department of Fish and Wildlife game wardens. So was an injured cub. Three other adult bears were found dead nearby, Mcleod said. Local populations of bears, deer and other common animals are expected to recover. But prospects for the black-backed woodpecker remain uncertain. The woodpecker is being considered for listing under the California Endangered Species Act. The woodpecker plays a key role in post-fire forest ecology. It creates nesting holes for other birds and mammals such as Western bluebirds and squirrels, environmentalists say. It is also threatened by the salvaging of burned trees. Those competing interests are already playing out on fire-stripped slopes where the woodpeckers are feasting on wood-boring beetles that began swarming dead trees while they were still smoldering. Crews below with chain saws and big-rig trucks were removing snags and salvaging timber from roads and utility corridors. “We’re looking for silver linings,” Bridgman said with a sigh. “But we’re caught between extremes.”