Honey Money WASHINGTON, D.C. — In Mozambique's woodlands, the sound of sweet evolution is at work. Mozambique is a country on the east coast of Africa. Over the centuries, people and some wild birds called honeyguides have learned to work together to find honey. They do it with a simple sound: "Brrr-hm." When people looking for honey make that bird call, the honeyguides lead the way to hidden bees' nests. Scientists tested this old practice and it passed with high-flying colors. When biologists compared the "brrr-hm" sound with other sounds, they found that when the honeyguides heard the traditional sound, they went to the nests a lot more.  When you make the right noise, you end up with honey 54 percent of the time, which is 54 times out of 100\. With the wrong noise, it's 16 percent of the time. That is 16 times out of 100. "It's an exchange of information for skills," said study lead author Claire Spottiswoode, an evolutionary biologist at the University of Cambridge. It happened to her. She didn't find nests until her companion made the right noise and found honey that is "very rich, very flavorful. It catches at the back of the throat." The honeyguide has a unique ability to find bees' nests. Scientists are not quite sure how it works, but it probably has to do with an advanced sense of smell, Spottiswoode said. Still, there is a problem. These nests are stuck in trees that are difficult for the birds to reach. Even worse, the bees sting the birds, sometimes to death. People who live in the region, called the Yao, make a living on the honey. They have axes and other tools that can get at those nests. They also use smoke to chase the bees away and keep them from stinging the birds. Yet the hidden bees make themselves difficult to find. Over the centuries the honeyguide and the Yao have developed the call. When honeyguides hear the sound they get noisy and then fly from tree to tree, leading the honey hunters to the bees. The hunters open the tree, smoke out the bees and collect the honey. The birds eat the wax, Spottiswoode said. While people train dogs and other animals to hunt, this is different. Those animals are pets and these are wild birds that are not trained by humans, Spottiswoode said. In Tanzania, the honeyguides also help people find the hidden nests. However, the birds and honey hunters there do it with a different sound, Spottiswoode said. Although the honeyguides are helpful and have a sweet name, they are not kind. The honeyguides can be ferocious parasites, which means they can be hurtful. The honeyguides will put their eggs in the nests of other birds. When the baby honeyguide hatches, it kills the other baby birds with its beak that has a hook at the end.