Experts examine wolf pups to better understand the wolf population Somewhere inside of a den came nearly inaudible squeaks and low moans. Carolin Humpal peeked inside to find five 2-week-old wolf pups. She is a wildlife biologist for the state of Minnesota.  Humpal's team came to examine the pups. They placed a trail camera outside the den. The research is part of an effort by Minnesota’s government to better understand the state's wolf population. John Erb is another scientist working with Humpal. He says their team is looking at new ways of locating and monitoring dens, and counting pups. Their work eventually will help scientists monitor what affects whether the pups live or die. They want to see why some survive and others do not.  ## Locating The Wolf Pups Along with Humpal on this mission to find wolf pups on a mid-April afternoon were scientists Barry Sampson and Mike Schrage, and a technician, Terry Perrault.  It took an hour to locate the den. We worked from mapped GPS-tracking movements of a radio-collared adult wolf. Schrage had led us to this patch of woods. They found the hole. They assumed the mother wolf was not far away, and would be observing our visit and waiting for us to leave. The pups were all piled together. The pups’ eyes were open, and they looked about a couple of weeks old. They moved away from Humpal a bit. But the chubby little pups did not struggle as she picked them up one at a time.  ## Quiet Visits To The Dens Perrault eased the pups into soft cloth bags. He weighed them quickly. Each was about 3.5 pounds. Schrage recorded the pups’ weights and genders. There were four male, one female. In less than a minute, each pup was put back in the den. The scientists performed their tasks quickly and in hushed voices. They entered the den as little as possible to not disturb the wolves.  The biologists completed the work in less than 15 minutes. They hung the trail camera and smoothed the dirt at the edge of the den. The pups were all in a heap again. Their mother was never seen. So far, scientists have visited and examined 12 to 15 dens in the past three or four years. Pup counts and pups' survival numbers can help Minnesota make better estimates of the number of wolves. Erb says understanding how the wolf pups survive can help scientists. They can use that information to understand other wolf population factors such as where animals that prey on them are. They also want to track parvovirus, a deadly virus that some wolves get.  Sampson said that after visiting the den site, they did not know how their visit affected the pups’ mother.  “There’s no doubt she’s going to know we’ve been here,” Sampson said. “The question is whether it’s enough to make her move them.” ## Moving To A New Den “Any time you visit the den of an animal, at some level there’s an effect,” Erb said. Their research suggests that visiting a den will cause some animals to move pups to a new den. But there’s no information yet, he said, that it has any important effect on pup survival. They have not seen an effect in studies that have put radio-collars on pups or surgically implanted radio-transmitters under the skin of pups.  Often, wolves change den sites even when humans do not enter the sites, Erb added. A wolf pack and its pups typically remain at a den site through early to mid-summer. Later in summer, the pack often moves to a site to meet. The pups can move around, but are not old enough to hunt. When pups are large enough, these sites becomes less important. The young wolves begin traveling more with their parents. According to the scientists, Minnesota has about 374 wolf packs. The average number of wolves in a pack at mid-winter was five in 2015\. Pack size typically doubles once pups are born in the spring. But not all of them survive through the next year. The number of wolves usually goes back down to about the same number as the past winter.