Wolves are killing and eating a lot of cows in Michigan. The state will try a wolf hunt to fight the problem. It will be Michigan's first wolf hunt. IRONWOOD, Mich. — John Koski is a farmer. He raises cows. Koski shows the bodies of two of his cows. They are almost picked clean. Koski is fighting against wolves. The wolves have killed or hurt many of his cows. Koski thinks he will have to stop raising cows. Michigan is going to try something new to solve the problem. It will have its first wolf hunt ever. Not everyone in the state wants the hunt. But many people in the city of Ironwood like the idea. More wolves have been in the city in recent years, said Scott Erickson. He is the city manager. Everyone understands there is a wolf problem, he said. David Bolen saw a wolf last fall. It was near his apartment building. The building is for older people. The wolf came near a Little League baseball field. Al Clemens said the wolves have killed deer in the area. Deer hunting is a popular activity. The hunting brings money to the community. Wolves are important to [American Indians](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=native+american). One Native American story says the first man had a pet wolf. [Wolves were almost gone from the U.S.](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species)around 1930. In 1973, a new law protected wolves. The number of wolves began to grow. In 1989 there were only three wolves in Michigan’s Upper Peninsula. Now, there are 653 wolves. Nancy Warren works for the National Wolfwatcher Coalition. The group wants to stop wolves from disappearing. She said that wolves are back because they were protected. Warren is against the hunt. The U.S. government stopped protecting the wolves last year. The government said the wolves are not in danger anymore. Michigan approved a wolf hunt for November and December. John Vucetich teaches about wildlife. He doesn't think the hunt will get rid of the wolves. Wolves stay in one place. They keep other wolves away, he said. If wolves get shot, the wolfpack will run. Then other wolves will come in, he explained. Scientists say there are other ways to protect animals. Farmers can try fences and dogs. Farmers can also try loud noises or flashing lights. Roger LaBine is against the wolf hunt. He is a Native American leader. People are afraid of wolves because they do not understand wolves, he said. If people respect the wolf, they won't be afraid.