Experts examine wolf pups to better understand the wolf population From somewhere in the dark recesses of the den came nearly inaudible squeaks and whimpers. Carolin Humpal, a wildlife biologist for the state of Minnesota, peeked inside. There were five 2-week-old wolf pups.  Humpal and her team had come to examine the pups. The team placed a trail camera outside their den. Their research is part of an effort by Minnesota’s government and Native American tribes to better understand the state's wolf population. John Erb is a wolf research biologist on the same team as Humpal. They all work for the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (DNR). Spotting pups through a trail camera is part of their broader plans for wolf monitoring. He says, “the pup part of it is kind of a pilot project. We’re trying to get some experience with locating dens." They are looking at new ways to monitor dens and count pups. The work eventually will help wolf researchers monitor pup survival and what things influence that survival. Along with Humpal on this mission to find wolf pups on a mid-April afternoon were wolf research biologists Barry Sampson and Mike Schrage, and a technician, Terry Perrault.  Just finding the den was a challenge. It took nearly an hour to locate the den. We worked from mapped GPS-tracking movements of a radio-collared adult wolf in this pack — though not the pups’ mother. Schrage had led us to a patch of wood to look for a hole in the ground with freshly excavated dirt all around. “Found it!” Sampson called out. He and Humpal assumed the wolf that had given birth to these pups was not far away, and would be observing our visit and waiting for us to leave. “They were all piled together,” Humpal said. “It was still fairly chilly, so they have to be huddled up together to share body heat.” The pups’ eyes were open, indicating they probably were a couple of weeks old, Sampson said. Although they moved away from Humpal a bit, she said the plump little furballs didn’t struggle as she picked them up one at a time and handed them out to Sampson. Perrault eased the pups into soft flannel bags. He weighed them quickly — about 3 1/2 pounds each. Schrage recorded the pups’ weights and genders — four male, one female. One by one, the pups went back to Sampson, and then to the waiting hand of Humpal, who still was mostly inside the den.  The biologists performed their tasks quickly and in hushed voices. These intrusions into dens are kept to a minimum, Sampson explained, to ensure minimal disturbance to the wolves.  The biologists completed the work in less than 15 minutes. They hung the trail camera and smoothed the dirt at the edge of the den. The pups were all in a heap again. Their mother was never seen. So far, researchers have visited and examined pups in 12 to 15 dens over the past three or four years. Pup counts and pups' survival are not needed for the DNR’s wolf population estimates, but tracking birth and death rates are. This information can help the agency make better population models, he said. Also, Erb says understanding how the wolf pups live can help researchers. They can relate that information to other wolf population factors such as number of prey or the presence of parvovirus, a deadly virus that some wolves get.  Sampson said that after visiting the den site, they didn't know how their visit affected the pups’ mother.  “There’s no doubt she’s going to know we’ve been here,” Sampson said. “The question is whether it’s enough to make her move them.” “Any time you visit the den of an animal, at some level there’s an effect,” Erb said. Their research suggests that some mothers will move their pups to a new den after a visit. But there’s no information yet, he said, that it has any important effect on pup survival. They haven't seen an effect in studies that have deployed radio-collars on pups or surgically implanted radio-transmitters in the pups.  Often, wolves change den sites even when humans don't enter the sites, he added. A wolf pack and its pups typically remain at a den site through early to mid-summer. Later in summer, the pack often moves to a rendezvous site. The pups are mobile, but not hunting. When pups are large enough, the meeting site becomes less important. By then, the young wolves are traveling more with their parents. According to the DNR’s research, Minnesota has an estimated 374 wolf packs. The average number of wolves in a pack at mid-winter was 5.1 in 2015, according to the agency. Pack size typically doubles once pups are born in the spring. But not all of them survive through the next year. The number of wolves usually goes back down to about the same number as the past winter.