Experts examine wolf pups to better understand the wolf population Inside the darkness of a den, Carolin Humpal could hear quiet animal sounds. Humpal is a scientist who studies wildlife animals for the state of Minnesota.  The den was covered by dirt. Humpal peeked inside the den to find a pile of wolf pups. They were maybe 2 weeks old. There were five of them. Humpal's team wants to learn more about Minnesota's wolf population. They want to count the number of wolf pups. Another scientist on her team is John Erb. He wants to learn how to find dens with pups, and monitor and count the pups. The team also wants to learn how the pups stay alive. They're hoping to discover why the number of wolves changes over time. They decide to go back to find the den. After an hour, Humpal's team found the den of pups.  Erb and Humpal assumed the mother wolf to these pups was somewhere not far away, observing our visit and waiting for us to leave. The team went inside the den.  The pups’ eyes were open, indicating they probably were a couple of weeks old, the team thought.  The scientists moved the pups into soft cloth bags. They weighed them quickly. Each pup was back in the den within less than a minute. The scientists performed their work quickly and quietly to try to disturb the wolves as little as possible. All of them wore rain clothes to block their smell. They also sprayed themselves with something that hid their smell.  In less than 15 minutes, they completed all their work. Then, they hung the trail camera on a nearby tree. The scientists smoothed the dirt at the edge of the den. The pups were all in a heap again. The scientists left the area.  Their mother was never seen. In the past three or four years, scientists are visiting more dens. The scientists have visited and inspected pups in 12 to 15 dens. Tracking how many pups are born and die could help scientists understand the number of wolves in Minnesota.  The scientists visited the den area. It was hard to tell if that affected the pups' mother.  The pups' mother will know the scientists were there. The real question is if that will make the mother move the pups to another hole.  The scientists' past research suggests that the mother wolf will move her pups.  But they are not sure yet.  Often, wolves change dens even without humans entering the den.  Pups remain in the den early in the year to mid-summer. Later in the fall, the pups get large enough. They have become young wolves. They then begin traveling more with their parent wolves. Pack size typically doubles once pups are born in the spring. Not all of them survive through the next year, though. The number of wolves usually goes back down to about the same number as the past winter.