Wild pets like bobcats or even wolf hybrids, part wolf and part dog, are too much for some pet owners to handle. Wolf Run in Kentucky offers these animals a new home with more space. NICHOLASVILLE, Ky. —  Many animals have found a safe place at Wolf Run Wildlife Refuge. Wild wolves have not lived near the refuge in central Kentucky for more than 100 years. However, wolves crossbred with dogs can be heard howling there. The Nicholasville, Kentucky refuge is a nonprofit group. It does not try to make money. Instead, it runs on gifts of money and volunteer work. Animal care volunteer Kara Baird says, “It’s not pretty like a zoo, where all the animals are new and bred for being looked at. This is a place for these animals to feel safe.” A pack of five wolf crossbreeds lives in a large area at the back of the refuge. Baird says that the animals are high-content crossbreeds, more wolf than dog. They look and act just like wolves. Baird raised two members of the pack herself. Baird says that the refuge is trying to spread awareness about the animals. She hopes programs there will help people respect and appreciate wolves without trying to own one. Baird says, “These are wonderful animals, but they aren’t pets.” She says people buy wolf crossbreeds thinking they will be like a dog. Once the owners cannot handle the animals, they are often put to sleep or taken to a refuge. One animal who lives there is Nibbles, a low-content crossbreed, more dog than wolf. He is mixed with a breed of large dog called a Great Pyrenees. Baird says that he does not have a mean bone in his body, but with his size and strength, he can still hurt people. Nibbles once gave Baird a black eye when he tried to lick her face. She says that is one example of why wolf crossbreeds should not be pets.  Mary Kindred owns Wolf Run Wildlife Refuge. She says that it is not a zoo full of healthy animals. It is a place for animals that have nowhere to go. A horse named Buddy is one such rescue animal. A dog tore a chunk out of his nose, and now he has a damaged face and snorts when he breathes. His owners neglected him and someone called Wolf Run. When volunteers arrived, they found Buddy thin and starving. The horse is still very social, and waits near his gate to greet people. Bandit is another animal that was hurt. The large, low-content crossbreed used to entertain golfers at a course in Kentucky. He was known for being friendly with golfers. Kindred says that one day a golfer got angry because Bandit tried to steal a ball, and beat him with a golf club. Bandit suffered a broken shoulder, and now stays away from people. He lives with another crossbreed named Khaleesi and a coyote named Loki. If animals are native to Kentucky, many are released into the wild when they are ready. Loki did not want to go. After volunteers released the coyote, he dug his way into Bandit and Khaleesi's area, and refused to leave. Not all of the animals at Wolf Run have been abused. Bob and Apache are bobcats. They came from homes where people tried to keep them as pets. Then they became too big for their owners to keep them.  Kindred says that the big task at the refuge now is building safety fences around the outside of all the animal homes. A new rule by the United States Department of Agriculture says that all dangerous animals need fences. The agency is part of the U.S. government that manages farming, animals and land. People help in their own ways. For example, Boy Scouts have painted barns and built toys and houses for the wolves.   Kindred says she first bought the land because she had a wolf crossbreed that needed more room to run. Since then, the refuge has been home to many different animals.