He is a long way from his pack, but the gray wolf who stars in a movie about his travels has a mystery mate, and maybe some pups. Just in time for the world premiere of a documentary about a gray wolf comes big news from wildlife officials. The famous wolf, who trekked from Oregon to California in 2011, may have found a mate. The endangered young wolf searched for thousands of miles to find a partner. Scientists say he has now probably found one. And there’s also a chance that he is a dad. If biologists are right, the wolf and his mystery mate would be the first known wolves to breed in the Oregon Cascades in 100 years. Now, wolf lovers hope the species could take hold again in California. The state hasn’t had any wolves for nearly a century. “OR7 is over 250 miles from the nearest known wolf pack,” said John Stephenson, a wolf biologist from Oregon who has been monitoring the animal. “It always seemed like a real long shot that he’d find a female wolf in that area. There aren’t any. “We don’t know where this female came from,” Stephenson said. “It’s exciting that a female would find him way down there so far away from where the wolves are.” Managing wolves has been hugely controversial. Wolf lovers say returning top predators to the wild is good for the ecosystem. Farmers and big-game hunters blame the creatures for killing sheep, cattle and elk. OR7 represents the mythic lone wolf. He became famous three years ago, when he left his pack in northeastern Oregon to find territory and a mate to call his own. His travels took him to California’s Siskiyou County late in 2011. He was the first gray wolf documented in the state since 1924. Biologists followed the creature with a tracking collar as he traveled about 3,000 miles. OR7 trekked back and forth between Oregon and California over the next few years. But recently the wolf’s behavior changed. He began to exhibit what biologists call “denning” or “localizing,” spending his time in a relatively small area in southwestern Oregon. “We were curious,” Stephenson said. “His collar is getting old. It’s over three years, and three years is the lifespan of those collars. We’d been getting a lot of questions about whether we would re-collar him. We weren’t going to. He’s a lone wolf. There’s only so much information you can get.” But with his new habits, the scientists decided to make one last effort “before the collar went out to see if he had found anybody,” Stephenson said. “I put some cameras out. I’m glad we did. I’m still very surprised by it. It’s pretty cool.” The cameras were in April. This month, they captured photographs of a black wolf squatting to urinate. The wolf also had a slender face and a narrow space between its ears, said wolf biologist Russ Morgan. That meant she was a girl. But was she a girlfriend? The two wolves had never been photographed together, which made it hard to be sure. But on May 3, biologists caught a break. At 6:30 a.m., OR7 was photographed walking by one of the remote cameras. An hour later, the female ran past the same spot. “They’re in the same area,” Stephenson said. “They certainly know about each other ... It’s very likely they’ve paired up.” Wolves are native to Oregon, but the last known example of the species was killed in the mid-1940s. They also used to live in California. The gray wolf was listed as [federally endangered](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species) in 1973. Now, with wolf packs solidly re-established and widely ranging in the West, state wildlife officials say it is likely California will be home to a number of wolves within 10 years. California is debating how it will manage that wolf population. Gray wolves tend to mate in late January and early February. Pups are born in April. Biologists do not plan to check on the possible wolf pack until the pups are older and beginning to leave the den. “If this pair does breed, in a decade there could be wolves recolonizing habitat in Northern California," said Steve Pedery, conservation director of the pro-wolf group Oregon Wild. "He’s certainly been there and checked it out.”