Wild pets like bobcats or even wolf hybrids, part wolf and part dog, are too much for some pet owners to handle. Wolf Run in Kentucky offers these animals a new home with more space. NICHOLASVILLE, Ky. —  Wolf crossbreeds are wolves combined with dogs. They are also most of the animals that live at the Wolf Run Wildlife Refuge. Many other kinds of animals have found a safe place there too. The refuge is in the town of Nicholasville, in the state of Kentucky. It is a nonprofit group. It does not try to make money. People give money and work there in their free time to keep it in business. Kara Baird gives her time to work with the animals. She says, “It’s not pretty like a zoo. This is a place for these animals to feel safe.” A pack of five wolf crossbreeds lives in a large area at the back of the refuge. Baird says that the animals are more wolf than dog. They look and act just like wolves. Baird raised two of the animals herself. Baird says that the refuge is trying to teach people about wolves. She hopes programs there will teach people to not try to own one. Baird says, “These are wonderful animals, but they aren’t pets.” She says people buy wolf crossbreeds thinking they will be like a dog. The owners cannot handle the animals. Then the crossbreeds are put to sleep or taken to a refuge. Nibbles is a crossbreed who lives at Wolf Run. He is more dog than wolf. He is mixed with a kind of large dog called a Great Pyrenees. Baird says that Nibbles can hurt people with his size and strength. He once gave Baird a black eye when he tried to lick her face. Baird says that is one example of why wolf crossbreeds should not be pets.  Mary Kindred owns Wolf Run Wildlife Refuge. She says that it is not a zoo full of healthy animals. It is a place for animals that have no hope. A horse named Buddy is one animal who lives there. A dog bit off part of his nose. Now he has a damaged face and snorts when he breathes. His owners mistreated him badly. When Wolf Run workers found him he was thin and starving. They fed him and cared for him. The horse is still very friendly and likes to greet people. Bandit is another animal that was hurt. The large, more-dog-than-wolf crossbreed used to visit with golfers at a course in Kentucky. Kindred says that one day a golfer got angry because Bandit tried to steal a ball. He beat Bandit with a golf club and broke his shoulder. Now Bandit stays away from people. He lives with another crossbreed named Khaleesi and a coyote named Loki. If they are from Kentucky, many animals are sent back into the wild when they are ready. Loki did not want to go. After workers released the coyote, he dug his way into Bandit and Khaleesi's area. Then he refused to leave. Not all the animals at Wolf Run have been abused. Bob and Apache are bobcats that people tried to keep as pets. Then they got too big for their owners.  Kindred says that workers at the refuge are building safety fences around the animal homes. A new rule by the United States Department of Agriculture says that all dangerous animals need the fences. The department is part of the U.S. government. It makes rules for farming, animals and land. People help in their own ways. For example, Boy Scouts have painted barns and built toys and houses for the wolves.   Kindred says that she first bought the land for her own wolf crossbreed. The animal needed more room to run. Since then, the refuge has been home to many different animals.