The lone gray wolf has traveled a few thousand miles in the last three years to find the perfect place to settle down and start his own pack. In 2011, a gray wolf became famous for trekking from Oregon to California. Now, biologists say he has probably found love. He may even be a dad. The endangered young wolf is called OR7. He searched for thousands of miles to find his partner. The news of his love life has come at a good time. Hollywood is releasing “OR7 - A Journey”, a documentary film about his life. The wolf and his mystery mate would be the first known wolves to breed in the Oregon Cascades in 100 years. Wolf lovers also hope wolves could again live in California. The state has had no wolves for nearly a century. “OR7 is over 250 miles from the nearest known wolf pack,” said John Stephenson, a wolf biologist who has been monitoring the wolf. “It always seemed like a real long shot that he’d find a female wolf in that area. There aren’t any. “We don’t know where this female came from,” Stephenson said. “It’s exciting that a female would find him way down there so far away from where the wolves are.” OR7 became famous three years ago. That was when he left his pack in northeastern Oregon to find a partner and a place to call his own. His travels took him to California’s Siskiyou County late in 2011. He was the first gray wolf seen in the state since 1924. Biologists followed the creature with a tracking collar. He traveled about 3,000 miles after leaving his pack. OR7 trekked back and forth between Oregon and California over the next few years. But recently the wolf’s behavior changed. He began to spend his time in a relatively small area in southwestern Oregon. “We were curious,” Stephenson said. “His collar is getting old. We’d been getting a lot of questions about whether we would re-collar him. We weren’t going to. He’s a lone wolf. There’s only so much information you can get.” But the scientists decided to make one last effort to see if he found a mate, Stephenson said. “I put some cameras out. I’m glad we did. I’m still very surprised by it. It’s pretty cool.” The cameras were placed in April. This month, they took pictures of a black wolf squatting to urinate. The wolf also had a thin face and a narrow space between its ears. That meant she was a girl. But was she a girlfriend? The two wolves had never been photographed together, which made it hard to be sure. But on May 3, biologists caught a break. At 6:30 a.m., OR7 was photographed walking by one of the cameras. An hour later, the female ran past the same spot. “They’re in the same area,” Stephenson said. “They certainly know about each other... It’s very likely they’ve paired up.” If they have paired up and have pups, it would be the first wolf pack in southwestern Oregon in nearly 100 years. Wolves historically lived in Oregon, but the last known wolf was killed there in the 1940s. They also used to range widely in California. The gray wolf was listed as [federally endangered](https://www.newsela.com/?tag=endangered+species) in 1973. Now, wolf packs are back and roaming widely in the West. Wildlife officials say it is likely California will be home to a number of wolves within 10 years. Wolf lovers say returning top predators to the wild is good for the ecosystem. But farmers and hunters blame wolves for killing sheep and cattle. Gray wolves usually mate in late January and early February. Pups are born in April. Biologists do not plan to check on the possible wolf pack until the pups are older and beginning to leave the den. They want to leave OR7’s possible pups alone for at least another month.