Woodrats have declined in population for a century, and vanished from some states. A small colony remains in New Jersey, at the foot of the steep Palisades along the Hudson River. HACKENSACK, N.J. — Though they have “rat” in their name, the Allegheny woodrats are nothing like the common rats that run across subway rails and leap out of urban dumpsters. Instead, these native New Jerseyans prefer the quiet life outside of cities and look more like jolly, oversized field mice. But times are tough for woodrats. Once common from New England to Alabama, the woodrat has disappeared from Massachusetts, Connecticut and New York, has greatly declined in Pennsylvania, and is nearly gone from Ohio and Indiana. In New Jersey, the only remaining woodrat colony lives in suburban isolation at the foot of the Palisades in Bergen County. The Palisades is a line of steep cliffs along the Hudson River which separates Jersey from New York. Woodrats tend to live in boulder fields at the base of mountains and cliffs, as these areas provide nooks and crannies in which to hide from predators. Other New Jersey colonies once lived on Green Pond Mountain and the Picatinny Arsenal in Morris County, as well as the Kittatinny Mountain Ridge in northwestern New Jersey. But they have disappeared. The surviving colony in Bergen County has been so cut off from other woodrat populations that their inbreeding has affected the gene pool, making them less able to fight off disease. “Because of roads and development, there no longer is any way for this group to have genetic exchange," said Mick Valent, principal zoologist with the state Department of Environmental Protection. "Inbreeding causes the colony’s genetic variability to decline.” Valent is on a mission to help save the woodrats of the Palisades by trying to keep the colony healthy and possibly importing woodrats from other regions. Humans and raccoons have unwittingly worked together in the woodrat’s decline. Roads and other development have cut off the pathways between different areas where woodrats live. At the same time, the woodrats have frequent contact with raccoons, which carry a type of roundworm that is often fatal to woodrats. In Bergen County, raccoons are thriving while the woodrats suffer. “Raccoons are far more prevalent today than in the past — where there are people, there are raccoons,” said Valent. That goes for parkland such as the Palisades, where garbage from picnickers is an easy food source. The woodrat’s own quirky behavior hasn’t helped. They collect shiny objects — from spent shotgun shells to soda cans, feathers and bones — and bring them back to their nests for no apparent reason. People who collect and store all sorts of things are nicknamed "pack rats." They also collect dried raccoon droppings, which contain undigested seeds and berries that the woodrats can feed on. Those raccoon droppings often also include roundworm eggs. “The eggs can last practically forever — they are highly stable,” Valent said. “The woodrats ingest the egg and the larvae gets into their bloodstream and the organs and if it hits the central nervous system, it can cause death.” To help stop the dying off of Bergen’s woodrats, Valent has launched a two-pronged strategy. Twice a year, in spring and fall, Valent travels by boat along the Hudson and lands at the hard-to-get areas at the foot of the Palisades where woodrats live. There, he sets out bait for raccoons, mixed with dewormer. The bait includes fishmeal and marshmallow fluff. “They love anything sweet,” Valent said. But it’s a challenging battle. “I see field mice that are infected with roundworm — you can tell because they just walk in a circle,” Valent said. “Then if a raccoon eats the mouse, he’s reinfected and it starts all over again.” Valent’s other strategy includes a plan to import woodrats from other states to help the Bergen colony’s gene pool grow stronger. The idea of transferring woodrats from one state to another is not new. In 2007, Olin Rhodes, a forestry and natural resources professor at Purdue University, collected 54 woodrats from genetically diverse colonies in Kentucky and Tennessee. He then successfully released them in Indiana, to re-establish populations at four sites that had historically been home to woodrats, as well as to add to reduced populations at two other sites. The species had been in slow decline for a century. The initial hit came in the early 1900s when a fungus laid waste to the American chestnut, which had been the woodrat’s main food source. The woodrats could store the nuts through the winter and get a head start on spring reproduction, having up to four litters a year. With chestnuts no longer abundant, woodrats started to rely on oak trees, but oaks are less reliable, tending toward boom-and-bust cycles of acorn production. And in the 1970s gypsy moths killed off or weakened many oaks, especially on the rocky Pennsylvania ridge tops where woodrats lived. Human development has chopped up forested regions, creating more “edge” habitats — that is, more places where animals live crowded together with other species of animals. According to Jerry Hassinger, a retired wildlife biologist with the Pennsylvania Game Commission, this change favors such woodrat predators as the great horned owl. Other woodrat predators have also grown more plentiful, including black rat snakes and bobcats. As a result, more woodrats get killed off. Hassinger has developed a protective fondness for the woodrat. He even takes offense to the term “rat” being used to refer to them, and wrote a poem about it. “It ain’t wood and it ain’t rat,” the poem reads. “These misnomers are a bummer — not funny; we call it the boulder bunny.” Whatever they should be called, the DEP’s Valent will keep trying to protect the last remaining woodrat colony in New Jersey. If he succeeds, Bergen’s “boulder bunnies” will remain a fixture amid the rubble at the foot of the Palisades.