In New Jersey, only a small colony of woodrats remains, at the foot of steep cliffs along the Hudson River. A zoologist is trying to save them. But it's an uphill battle. HACKENSACK, N.J. — Allegheny woodrats are nothing like ordinary rats. They don't run across subway rails. They don't leap out of big-city garbage cans. Instead, these native New Jerseyans like the quiet life. They live out in the country and look more like big, jolly mice. But times are tough for woodrats. Across the United States, there are far fewer of them than there used to be. They have disappeared from Massachusetts, Connecticut and New York. There are a lot less of them in Pennsylvania. They are nearly gone in Ohio and Indiana. In New Jersey, there is only one remaining group of woodrats. It lives at the foot of the Palisades in suburban Bergen County. The Palisades is a long line of steep cliffs along the Hudson River. Woodrats usually stay in fields filled with boulders near the bottom of mountains. These places give them a lot of places to hide. The woodrats in Bergen County now live far away from other woodrats. For this reason, they are only able to mate with each other. This has weakened them, and made them less able to fight off disease. Mick Valent is a zoologist. Scientists like him study animals. His goal is to help save the woodrats of the Palisades by making them healthier. He may even bring woodrats from other states to breed with the New Jersey colony. Raccoons are one main reason that New Jersey woodrats are in danger. Raccoons often have a type of worm living inside them. These worms don't hurt raccoons, but can kill woodrats. Nowadays, there are many more raccoons than there used to be. This is because raccoons can live on the food people throw away. The problem is that woodrats pick up dried raccoon droppings and take it to their nests. They do this because raccoon droppings often still have seeds and berries in them. But that's not all that's in the droppings. There may also be roundworm eggs in them too. Woodrats swallow the eggs, which get into their blood and organs. If the eggs spread to the woodrats' brain, they can kill them. Valent has a plan to stop New Jersey's woodrats from dying off. Two times a year he goes to the areas where woodrats live. He puts out food made of ground-up fish for raccoons. He adds some marshmallow fluff to the mix. Raccoons "love anything sweet,” he said. Hidden in the food is medicine that kills roundworms. Woodrats have other problems besides raccoons. The great horned owl, black rat snakes and bobcats have grown in numbers. All those animals eat woodrats. Finding food is not as easy as it used to be for the woodrats. Their favorite food, chestnuts, was almost wiped out by a fungus around 100 years ago. When chestnuts became hard to find, woodrats switched to acorns. Then a kind of moth almost killed off acorns too. Now woodrats don't get as much good food as they used to. This means they don't have as many babies. Because fewer babies are being born, Valent wants to bring in woodrats from other states. He hopes new woodrats will help the Bergen colony to grow stronger and healthier. Another scientist who is trying to help the woodrat is biologist Jerry Hassinger. Woodrats have a special place in his heart. He even doesn't like that they are called “rats.” In fact, he wrote a poem about it. “It ain’t wood and it ain’t rat,” the poem reads. “These misnomers [wrong names] are a bummer — not funny; we call it the boulder bunny.” Whatever they should be called, Bergen’s “boulder bunnies” are still around. If Valent and others can help them enough, they will be able to keep on living in the Palisades.