Once common in the eastern U.S., the woodrat has shrunk in population and disappeared from many states. Suburban sprawl, raccoons, and their own odd behavior, aren't helping. HACKENSACK, N.J. — They may have “rat” in their name, but the Allegheny woodrats are nothing like ordinary rats. They don't run across subway rails or leap out of big city garbage cans. Instead, these native New Jerseyans like the quiet life outside of big towns and look more like jolly, oversized field mice. But times are tough for woodrats. Once common from New England to Alabama, they have disappeared from Massachusetts, Connecticut and New York. There are far fewer of them in Pennsylvania these days, and they are nearly gone from Ohio and Indiana. In New Jersey, the only remaining woodrat colony lives at the foot of the Palisades in suburban Bergen County. The Palisades is a line of steep cliffs along the Hudson River. Woodrats usually live in boulder fields at the base of mountains and cliffs. There they find hiding places. The colony in Bergen County now lives far away from other woodrat populations. For this reason, they are only able to mate with each other. This has weakened them, and made them less able to fight off disease. Mick Valent is a zoologist who studies animals for a living. He is on a mission to help save the woodrats of the Palisades. He is trying to keep the colony healthy and may even import woodrats from other regions. Not only people, but raccoons have helped kill off woodrats. Raccoons often have a type of roundworm living inside them. These worms don't hurt raccoons, but can kill woodrats. In Bergen County, there are many more raccoons than there used to be. "Where there are people, there are raccoons,” said Valent. This is because raccoons can live on the food people throw away. The problem is that woodrats pick up dried raccoon droppings. The droppings often still have seeds and berries in them that woodrats can eat. But they can also have roundworm eggs in them as well. “The eggs can last practically forever,” Valent said. Woodrats swallow the eggs, which get into their bloodstream and organs. If the eggs reach the woodrats' brain, they "can cause death." Valent has a two-part plan to stop Bergen's woodrats from dying off. Twice a year, in spring and fall, Valent travels by boat along the Hudson. He lands at the hard-to-get areas where woodrats live. There, he sets out bait for raccoons, mixed with medicine that kills roundworms. The bait includes ground-up fish and marshmallow fluff. “They love anything sweet,” Valent said. But it’s a challenging battle. Field mice, which raccoons eat, are also made sick by roundworm. If a raccoon free of worms eats a sick mouse, it gets worms all over again. The other part of Valent’s plan is to transfer woodrats from other states. He hopes new woodrats will help the Bergen colony to grow stronger. Woodrats have been slowly dying off for a century. The first blow came in the early 1900s, when the American chestnut was almost wiped out by a fungus. Until then, the chestnut had been the woodrats' main food. Woodrats would store the nuts through the winter. Having more food made it possible for females to have more babies. In fact, they gave birth up to four times a year. With chestnuts now hard to find, woodrats started to rely on oak trees. But oaks are less dependable. Some years they produce a lot of acorns, other years they produce very few. And on top of that, in the 1970s gypsy moths killed off many oaks. Human building has chopped up forests, making it harder for animals to find places to live. Because there are fewer places to live, animals sometimes live crowded together with other animals that hunt them. Animals that eat woodrats, like the great horned owl, black rat snakes and bobcats, have grown more common, according to biologist Jerry Hassinger. So more woodrats are getting killed these days. Hassinger has become quite fond of the woodrat. He even doesn't like that they are called “rats.” In fact, he wrote a poem about it. “It ain’t wood and it ain’t rat,” the poem reads. “These misnomers [wrong names] are a bummer — not funny; we call it the boulder bunny.” Whatever they should be called, Bergen’s “boulder bunnies” are still hanging on. If Valent and others can help them enough, they will be able to keep on living at the foot of the Palisades.