A small colony of woodrats lives at the foot of steep cliffs along the Hudson River. They are beset by humans and raccoons, and their own odd behavior. A zoologist is trying to save them. HACKENSACK, N.J. — Though they have “rat” in their name, the Allegheny woodrats are nothing like the common rats that run across subway rails and leap out of city dumpsters. Instead, these native New Jerseyans prefer the quiet life of the countryside and look more like jolly, oversized field mice. But times are tough for woodrats. Once common from New England to Alabama, the woodrat has disappeared from Massachusetts, Connecticut and New York. It has greatly declined in Pennsylvania, and is nearly gone from Ohio and Indiana. In New Jersey, the only remaining woodrat colony lives at the foot of the Palisades, a line of steep cliffs, in suburban Bergen County. Woodrats tend to live in boulder fields at the base of mountains and cliffs. There they find nooks and crannies in which to hide from predators. The colony in Bergen County has been so cut off from other woodrat populations that the animals are only able to mate with each other. They are less able to fight off disease because they have not inherited all the different genes they need to resist illnesses. Mick Valent, principal zoologist with the state Department of Environmental Protection, is on a mission to help save the woodrats of the Palisades. He is trying to keep the colony healthy and may even import woodrats from other regions. Humans and raccoons have both helped cause the woodrat’s decline. Roads and other building projects have cut off the pathways between different areas where woodrats live. At the same time, the woodrats have frequent contact with raccoons, which carry a type of roundworm that is often fatal to woodrats. In Bergen County, there are many more raccoons than there used to be. "Where there are people, there are raccoons,” said Valent. That goes for parkland such as the Palisades, where garbage from picnickers is an easy food source. The woodrat’s own strange behavior hasn’t helped. They collect shiny objects — from shotgun shells to soda cans, feathers and bones — and bring them back to their nests for no apparent reason. They also collect dried raccoon droppings, which contain seeds and berries that the woodrat can feed on. Those raccoon droppings often also include roundworm eggs. “The eggs can last practically forever,” Valent said. Woodrats swallow the eggs, which get into their bloodstream and the organs. If they reach the woodrats' central nervous system, they "can cause death.” To help stop the dying off of Bergen’s woodrats, Valent has launched a two-part strategy. Twice a year, in spring and fall, Valent travels by boat along the Hudson. He lands at the hard-to-get areas at the base of the Palisades where woodrats live. There, he sets out bait for raccoons, mixed with medicine that kills roundworms. The bait includes fishmeal and marshmallow fluff. “They love anything sweet,” Valent said. But it’s a challenging battle. “I see field mice that are infected with roundworm — you can tell because they just walk in a circle,” Valent said. “Then if a raccoon eats the mouse, he’s reinfected and it starts all over again.” Valent’s other strategy includes a plan to import woodrats from other states. He hopes this will help the Bergen colony’s gene pool grow stronger. The idea of moving woodrats from one state to another is not new. In 2007, Olin Rhodes, a forestry and natural resources professor at Purdue University, collected 54 woodrats from colonies in Kentucky and Tennessee. He then released them in Indiana. These new woodrats helped re-establish populations at four sites where woodrats had lived before. They also added to reduced populations at two other sites. Woodrats have been in slow decline for a century. The first blow came in the early 1900s, when the American chestnut was almost killed off by a fungus. Until then, the chestnut had been the woodrats' main food source. They would store the nuts through the winter. Having more food made it possible for females to have more babies — up to four litters a year. With chestnuts now hard to find, woodrats started to rely on oak trees. But oaks are less dependable: Some years they produce a lot of acorns, other years they produce very few. And in the 1970s gypsy moths killed off or weakened many oaks, especially on the rocky Pennsylvania ridge tops where woodrats lived. Human development has chopped up forested regions, creating more “edge” habitats that is, more places where animals live crowded together with other species of animals. According to Jerry Hassinger, a retired wildlife biologist with the Pennsylvania Game Commission, this crowding gives animals that hunt for woodrats a big advantage. Such predators, like the great horned owl, black rat snakes and bobcats have grown in numbers and have killed more woodrats. Hassinger has developed a fondness for the woodrat. He even takes offense to the term “rat” being used to refer to them, and wrote a poem about it. “It ain’t wood and it ain’t rat,” the poem reads. “These misnomers are a bummer — not funny; we call it the boulder bunny.” Whatever they should be called, the DEP’s Valent will continue his efforts to protect the last remaining woodrat colony in New Jersey. If he succeeds, Bergen’s “boulder bunnies” will be able to keep on living among the rubble at the base of the Palisades.