Scientists studied the rib bones connected to the base of the neck. The bones were big, and showed the mammoths did not develop normally, and were unhealthy. Woolly mammoths are known for their heavy fur coats and long, curved teeth called tusks. But these days, another body part is capturing scientists' attention. Some mammoths have extra bones, called cervical ribs. These ribs are giving scientists new clues. They are helping to explain what made the woolly mammoth die off about 10,000 years ago. Cervical ribs are extra rib bones that stick out from the spine at the base of the neck. Elephants living today grow them sometimes, too. But these ribs were about 10 times more common in mammoths. Dutch scientists published these findings Tuesday in a science magazine. The cervical ribs could have been dangerous to the mammoths. The bones mostly show up in animals that don't develop normally during the early stages of pregnancy. Problems like this can sometimes kill the baby before it's grown. In humans, nine out of 10 babies born with a cervical rib die at a young age. The scientists became interested in cervical ribs in mammoths after their bones were discovered in the Netherlands. The bones were found during a digging project. The harbor in the city of Rotterdam is being extended into the North Sea. Three of the bones they found were from the lower part of the neck. It was just above the part of the spine that connects with rib bones. Two of the three neck bones showed signs of having been connected with ribs. That chance discovery made the scientists wonder just how common cervical ribs were. “We knew these were just about the last mammoths living there. So we suspected something was happening,” study leader Jelle Reumer said. Reumer is a paleontologist — a scientist who studies ancient life during the time before modern humans. He also runs the Natural History Museum in Rotterdam. Reumer and two co-workers searched the Natural History Museum and another museum. They found 16 samples of mammoth bones from the base of the neck. Seven of the samples were missing the part of the bone that would have clued the scientists in on whether a cervical rib had been attached. Of the other nine that had the part, six were normal. But, three once had a cervical rib. So one-third of the samples had the rib. To compare, the scientists also looked at other bones. They found bones of 21 Asian elephants and seven African elephants in other museums in Europe. Among the 28 elephants, only one had a cervical rib. This meant that the chance of a cervical rib showing up was very small. The mammoths were nearly 10 times more likely than the elephants to have a cervical rib. The scientists said that the chance mammoths had the extra ribs was “extremely high.” But they weren't just more common. The bones were larger as well. In mice with cervical ribs, those with bigger bones have more health problems than those with smaller bones. “There was indeed a problem in this population,” Reumer said. Scientists found two reasons for the high number of cervical ribs in mammoths. The first is that the mammoths were interbreeding. Mammoths who were close relatives made babies together. Babies born to parents who interbreed are more likely to have physical problems. Interbreeding would be expected among a population that's getting smaller and smaller. The second reason scientists found is that the mammoths lived in a tough environment. They faced hunger and disease. The harsh conditions would have made it difficult for female mammoths to bear healthy offspring. The Dutch scientists concluded that the high number of cervical ribs was probably because of "a combination of inbreeding and harsh conditions.” Scientists say that this made them weaker. Not being healthy might have added to the dying off of the mammoths.