“From a single individual you can get information about the entire population.” Genes help make you who you are. They shape the way you look. They decide how your body acts. Every living thing has genes. They are passed down from parent to child. People have around 24,000 genes. Other kinds of animals have a different number of genes. A complete set of genes is called a genome. Scientists already know which genes are in a person's genome. They know less about other animals. A team of scientists has just pieced together the genome of an unusual animal: the woolly mammoth. Woolly mammoths are related to elephants. Woolly mammoths died out thousands of years ago. The scientists were hoping to discover why. The team studied two mammoths. One lived on Wrangel Island. It is an island near Siberia. The other lived in Siberia. Both places are part of Russia. The mammoths on Wrangel Island were some of the last mammoths. They died out only 4,000 years ago. The mammoths in Siberia died out 10,000 years ago. Still, the Wrangel Island mammoths did eventually die out. The team thought they knew why. They guessed that the mammoths ended up with too few kinds of genes. Animals do better when they have many different kinds of genes. The scientists decided to test their idea. They compared a Wrangel Island mammoth with a mammoth from Siberia. The Siberian mammoth was much older. The Wrangel Island mammoth lived 4,300 years ago. The Siberian mammoth lived 44,800 years ago. The scientists only had small bits of each animal. Still, they could see all the genes each animal had. The Siberian mammoth had more kinds of genes. The number of different mammoth genes had gotten smaller over time. Probably this was because the number of animals had gotten smaller. It helps to have a lot of different genes, scientist Ian Barnes said. For example, imagine if a lot of animals in a group get sick. Some will die. Others will have a special gene that keeps them alive. They will then pass that gene down to their children. Things are harder for animals with fewer kinds of genes, Barnes said. In the end they may die out.