“From a single individual you can get information about the entire population.” In what may be a first for a long-extinct nonhuman animal, scientists have assembled the genome — the complete set of genes — of the woolly mammoth. The hope is that it will provide insight into why the last surviving population of the great beasts disappeared. An international team reported their findings Thursday. Study co-author Eleftheria Palkopoulou said that recent successes in studying the genetics of Neanderthals and other ancestors of modern humans inspired her team to focus on woolly mammoths. The team studied the genetic makeup of two mammoths. One had lived on Wrangel Island, off the coast of Siberia, Russia. The other lived much earlier in mainland Siberia. The Wrangel Island mammoths are particularly interesting because they were among the last surviving members of their species. They died out only 4,000 years ago, some 6,000 years after their relatives had vanished from mainland Siberia. Palkopoulou and the others wanted to see if the Wrangel Island mammoths had less genetic diversity — less genetic variety — than their mainland Siberian ancestors. Genes are made up of DNA molecules, which can be thought of as a set of instructions that makes each species — and each individual — what it is. The more varied the DNA of a particular population, the more likely it is that the population will be able to adapt to changes in the environment. The team suspected that a decrease in genetic diversity had contributed to the extinction of the Wrangel Island mammoths. To figure out if that was true, the team first had to find woolly mammoth bits well-preserved enough to study. Eventually they chose two things: soft tissue from a young male that lived in northeastern Siberia around 44,800 years ago, and a large tooth from a Wrangel Island male mammoth that lived about 4,300 years ago. Using the genome of a modern African savanna elephant as a reference point, the group then analyzed the mammoth DNA. Mammal genomes have two copies of every DNA molecule, one contributed from an animal’s mother and another from its father. By comparing the two DNA molecule copies in each mammoth and noting when they were identical and when they were not, Palkopoulou and the others were able to estimate how closely related the mammoths’ parents were. More closely related parents are more likely to contribute identical DNA molecules. Their results allowed the team not just to compare the two individual mammoths, but also to get a sense of the overall genetic diversity found in the Wrangel Island and older Siberian populations. In addition, the team was able to estimate the size of the two populations. “From a single individual you can get information about the entire population,” Palkopoulou said. The Wrangel Island mammoth had many pairs of DNA molecules with no variation between the mother’s and the father’s contributions, a sign that the animal’s parents were probably related and that the isolated population of mammoths was small. By contrast, the older Siberian mammoth’s DNA had more genetic variation. The data also pointed to two major population declines in mammoth history: one that occurred 250,000 to 300,000 years ago and another that took place around 12,000 years ago, at the end of the last Ice Age. The analysis could help scientists understand why species die out, and if genetic factors have to do with it, Palkopoulou said. Generally, scientists believe that lower genetic diversity lessens a population’s chances of survival. “Your genome is like your tool kit for getting out of trouble,” said Ian Barnes, an evolutionary biologist at the Natural History Museum in London. “If you as a species have lots of different tools available, it means some individuals will die when the environment changes or a disease arrives, but there will probably be others that will be resistant and will pass those genes on to the next generation. If you don’t have the diversity, it’s a challenge.”