Extra bones called cervical ribs attached to the base of the neck showed the mammoths had not developed normally. They were unhealthy and quicker to die off. Woolly mammoths are known for their thick fur and long, curved teeth called tusks. But these days, scientists are interested in another body part. Some mammoths have extra bones called cervical ribs. They are giving scientists new knowledge about mammoths' lives and what made them die off. The last woolly mammoth lived about 10,000 years ago. Cervical ribs are extra rib bones. They stick out from the spine at the base of the neck. Elephants living today grow them sometimes, too. But these ribs were about 10 times more common in mammoths. Dutch scientists published these findings Tuesday in a magazine. The ribs don't always hurt the animal. But they mostly show up in animals that didn't grow normally in the womb. Problems like this happen in other animals. But it often kills the baby before it's grown. In humans, nine out of 10 babies born with a cervical rib die at a young age. The scientists got interested in these ribs only recently. Mammoth bones were discovered in the Netherlands. The bones were found during a digging project in Rotterdam. Two of the three neck bones they found didn't look normal. It seemed like they were once connected with ribs. The find made the scientists wonder just how common cervical ribs were. “We knew these were just about the last mammoths living there. So we suspected something was happening,” Jelle Reumer said. Reumer is a scientist who studies old bones. He also runs the Natural History Museum in Rotterdam. Reumer and his team searched two museums in the Netherlands. They found 16 samples of mammoth neck bones. Seven of the samples were missing the part of the bone they were looking for. It would have clued the scientists in on whether a cervical rib had been attached. Of the other nine, six were normal. But, three once had a cervical rib. So one third of the samples had the rib. The scientists also looked at elephant bones. They wanted to compare them with the mammoths. They looked in other museums in Europe. They found the bones of 21 Asian elephants and seven African elephants. Of the 28 elephants, only one had a cervical rib. The mammoths were almost 10 times more likely to have a cervical rib than the elephants. But the bones weren't just more common in mammoths. The bones were larger as well. Some mice have cervical ribs too. And those mice with bigger bones have more health problems than those with smaller bones. The Dutch scientists found two reasons for the high numbers of cervical ribs in mammoths. The first is that the mammoths were interbreeding. When close relatives have babies together it's called interbreeding. It causes animals to have babies with physical problems. Interbreeding would be expected among mammoths. Their numbers were getting smaller and smaller. Since they were dying off, there were fewer mammoths to mate with. The scientists think another reason led to so many cervical ribs. The mammoths lived in a hard environment. They faced hunger and disease. This would have made it difficult for female mammoths to have healthy children. The scientists confirmed that there was a high number of cervical ribs. Then they concluded that this was probably because of both inbreeding and the tough environment. Scientists think this made them weaker. Being weak might have added to their dying off.