“From a single individual you can get information about the entire population.” Genes shape the way you look and the way your body acts. They are found in every living thing and are passed down from parent to child. All humans share most of the same genes. The genes that are shared make us humans — and not another kind of animal. Of course, every person has a few genes special to them. It is those genes that make them different from every other person who has ever lived. Humans have around 24,000 genes. Other kinds of animals have different numbers of genes. A complete set of genes is called a genome. Scientists have already figured out which genes are in the human genome. Now, a team of scientists has pieced together the genome of a giant animal known as the woolly mammoth. Woolly mammoths were the long-haired ancestors of today's elephants. The mammoths died out thousands of years ago. The team had a special reason for trying to figure out the woolly mammoth genome. They believed the information might help them figure out why the animals died out. The team looked at the genes found in two mammoths. One had lived on Wrangel Island, off the coast of Siberia. The other lived much earlier in mainland Siberia. Both places are part of Russia. The Wrangel Island mammoths are particularly interesting to scientists. They were among the last of the mammoths. They died out only 4,000 years ago, some 6,000 years after their mainland Siberian relatives. The team had a hunch. They suspected that as time passed fewer and fewer different genes were present in the woolly mammoths' genome. They believed the Wrangel Island mammoths eventually died out because of this. A large collection of different genes helps animals adjust to changes in the world around them. The scientists decided to test their idea. They compared a Wrangel Island mammoth with a much older mainland Siberian mammoth. The Siberian mammoth turned out to have a larger number of different genes. The team chose two samples to study. One was a bit of flesh from a young male that lived in Siberia around 44,800 years ago. The other was a large tooth from a Wrangel Island male mammoth that lived about 4,300 years ago. Genes are made up of DNA molecules. A molecule is a simple kind of chemical. A genome contains two copies of each DNA molecule. One copy comes from an animal’s mother and the other from its father. Sometimes the two molecules are exactly the same, and sometimes they are different. The Wrangel Island mammoth had many pairs of DNA molecules in which both molecules were exactly the same. There was no difference between the one that came from the mother and the one that came from the father. The lack of difference means the animal’s parents were probably closely related. The more closely related a parent, the more likely it is that a DNA molecule will be exactly the same. Closely related animals are less likely to mate when a population is large and they have more choices. Therefore the Wrangel Island population was probably small. Over time, small populations usually end up having fewer different genes in their genome. The study could help scientists understand why animals die out. It suggests that having fewer different genes could be one big reason. “Your genome is like your tool kit for getting out of trouble,” said scientist Ian Barnes. It is a big advantage for a group of animals to have "lots of different tools," Barnes explained. For example, having many different types of genes helps a population when a disease arrives. Some animals will die, but others will have a gene that helps them stay alive. They will then pass that gene down to their children. Things are more difficult if animal populations have fewer kinds of genes in their genome. "It’s a challenge,” Barnes said.