Big cervical rib bones at the base of the neck indicated that something was very wrong with the last of the woolly mammoths that lived in what is now the Netherlands. Woolly mammoths are famous for their thick fur coats and enormous tusks. But new clues about other distinctive bones of theirs are giving scientists insight into what caused the woolly mammoth to become extinct roughly 10,000 years ago. So-called cervical ribs are extra rib bones that protrude from the vertebrae at the base of the neck. These ribs were about 10 times more common in mammoths living in the Late Pleistocene age than they are in elephants alive today. These numbers come from a study by Dutch researchers published Tuesday in the science journal PeerJ. The cervical ribs themselves aren’t necessarily dangerous. But they tend to appear in animals that failed to develop normally during the early stages of pregnancy, and problems associated with abnormal development can be fatal. In humans, about 90 percent of babies born with a cervical rib die before they are old enough to reproduce. The authors of the new study became interested in cervical ribs in mammoths after mammoth fossils were dug up in the Netherlands. The fossils were found during a public works project to extend Rotterdam Harbor into the North Sea. Three of the bones were from the lower portion of the neck, just above the part of the spine that connects with rib bones. Two of the three specimens showed signs of having been connected with ribs. That chance discovery made the researchers wonder just how common cervical ribs were. “We knew these were just about the last mammoths living there, so we suspected something was happening,” study leader Jelle Reumer said. Reumer is a paleontologist — a scientist who studies ancient life before the times of modern humans. He's also the director of the Natural History Museum Rotterdam. Reumer and two co-workers looked in the collections of the Natural History Museum and the Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden, both in the Netherlands, and found 16 samples of mammoth vertebrae from the base of the neck. Seven of the samples were missing the part that would have clued the researchers in on whether a cervical rib had been attached. Of the remaining nine, six were normal. But, three once had a cervical rib, which worked out to 33.3 percent of their samples which had the rib. For the sake of comparison, the researchers also analyzed bones from 21 Asian elephants and seven African elephants that were in museum collections in Europe. Among the 28 elephants, only one had a cervical rib. The frequency of one occurring, therefore, was 3.6 percent. The mammoths were nearly 10 times more likely than the elephants to have a cervical rib. This led researchers to conclude that the frequency of the extra ribs was “extremely high” among the mammoths. Not only were they unusually common, but the shape of the vertebrae suggested the bones were unusually large as well. In mice with cervical ribs, those with bigger bones have more health problems than those with smaller bones. “There was indeed a problem in this population,” Reumer said. There are two explanations for the high frequency of cervical ribs in mammoths, and both are probably part of the story, the researchers wrote. The first is that the mammoths were interbreeding, which would be expected among a dwindling population that was dying off. The second is that the mammoths were struggling with famine, disease and other environmental conditions. This would have made it difficult for female mammoths to bear healthy offspring. The research team concluded that the high frequency of cervical ribs was due to "a combination of inbreeding and harsh conditions.” The animals’ vulnerability “may well have contributed to the eventual extinction of the woolly mammoths.”