“From a single individual you can get information about the entire population.” For the first time, scientists have pieced together the complete set of genes — the genome — of the long-extinct woolly mammoth. The new information may help explain why the last population of the great beasts disappeared. An international team of scientists reported their findings in a study published Thursday. The team worked out the genetic makeup of two mammoths. One had lived on Wrangel Island, off the coast of Siberia, Russia. The other lived much earlier on mainland Siberia. The Wrangel Island mammoths are particularly interesting because they were among the last surviving members of their species. They died out only 4,000 years ago, some 6,000 years after their relatives vanished from mainland Siberia. The team wanted to see if the Wrangel Island mammoths had less genetic diversity — fewer available genes — than their mainland Siberian ancestors. Genes are made up of DNA molecules. A molecule is a simple chemical made out of a bunch of atoms bonded together. DNA can be thought of as a set of instructions that makes each species — and each individual — what it is. DNA is what makes birds develop wings, for example, or what makes someone end up with red hair. The more varied the DNA of a particular animal population, the more likely it is that population will be able to survive. Genetic diversity allows a population to adapt to changes in the environment. The team thought that the genetic diversity of the Wrangel Island mammoth population had probably declined over time. If it had, they suspected that the lack of diversity had contributed to the animals' extinction. To test their theory, the team first had to find woolly mammoth bits well-preserved enough to study. Eventually they chose two samples: soft tissue from a young male that lived in northeastern Siberia around 44,800 years ago, and a large tooth from a Wrangel Island male mammoth that lived about 4,300 years ago. The team then analyzed the DNA of the two mammoths. Mammal genomes have two copies of every DNA molecule in them. One comes from an animal’s mother and the other from its father. By comparing the two copies in each mammoth and noting when they were exactly the same and when they were not, the scientists were able to estimate how closely related the mammoths’ parents were. More closely related parents are more likely to contribute DNA molecules that are exactly the same. The team's results allowed them to do more than just compare the two individual mammoths. The scientists were also able to get a sense of the overall genetic diversity of the Wrangel Island and older Siberian populations. In addition, the team was able to estimate the size of the two populations. “From a single individual you can get information about the entire population,” study co-author Eleftheria Palkopoulou said. The Wrangel Island mammoth had many pairs of DNA molecules with no difference between the mother’s and the father’s contributions. The lack of difference is a sign that the animal’s parents were probably related. In turn, that implies that the isolated population of mammoths was small. In a larger population, it would be less likely that closely related animals would mate. By contrast, the older Siberian mammoth’s DNA exhibited more genetic diversity. Pairs of DNA molecules differed from each other more frequently. The team's findings also suggested that there were two major population declines in mammoth history. One probably occurred 250,000 to 300,000 years ago. The other most likely took place around 12,000 years ago, at the end of the last Ice Age. The study could help scientists understand why species die out, and if genetic factors have to do with it, Palkopoulou said. Generally, scientists believe that lower genetic diversity lessens a population’s chances of surviving. “Your genome is like your tool kit for getting out of trouble,” said biologist Ian Barnes. For a species, it is a big advantage to have "lots of different tools available," Barnes explained. "Some individuals will die when the environment changes or a disease arrives, but there will probably be others that will be resistant and will pass those genes on to the next generation. If you don’t have the diversity, it’s a challenge.”