“We knew these were just about the last mammoths living there, so we suspected something was happening,” said a paleontologist about what the rib bones suggest. Woolly mammoths are known for their thick fur coats and enormous tusks. But their so-called cervical ribs are capturing scientists' attention these days. These distinctive bones are giving scientists new clues about what made the woolly mammoth die off roughly 10,000 years ago. Cervical ribs are extra rib bones that stick out from the spine at the base of the neck. Elephants living today grow them sometimes, too. But these ribs were about 10 times more common in mammoths living in the Late Pleistocene age. Dutch researchers published these findings Tuesday in the science magazine PeerJ. The cervical ribs themselves aren’t necessarily dangerous. But they tend to appear in animals that didn't develop normally during the early stages of pregnancy. Babies who don't develop normally may have short lifespans. In humans, about 90 percent of babies born with a cervical rib die before they are old enough to have their own babies. The authors of the study became interested in cervical ribs in mammoths after mammoth bones were discovered in the Netherlands. The bones were found during a project to extend Rotterdam Harbor into the North Sea. Three of the bones were from the lower portion of the neck, just above the part of the spine that connects with rib bones. Two of the three specimens showed signs of having been connected with ribs. That chance discovery made the researchers wonder just how common cervical ribs were. “We knew these were just about the last mammoths living there, so we suspected something was happening,” study leader Jelle Reumer said. Reumer is a paleontologist at Utrecht University. Paleontologists like Reumer study ancient life, before the existence of modern humans. Reumer also runs the Natural History Museum in Rotterdam. Reumer and two co-workers looked in the collections of the Natural History Museum and the Naturalis Biodiversity Center, both in the Netherlands. They found 16 samples of mammoth vertebrae from the base of the neck. Seven of the samples were missing the part that would have clued the researchers in on whether a cervical rib had been attached. Of the remaining nine, six were normal. But, three once had a cervical rib. Of the samples then, 33 percent had the rib. For the sake of comparison, the researchers also analyzed bones from 21 Asian elephants and seven African elephants that were in museum collections in Europe. Among the 28 elephants, only one had a cervical rib. The frequency of one occurring, therefore, was 3.6 percent. The mammoths were nearly 10 times more likely than the elephants to have a cervical rib. This led researchers to conclude that the frequency of the extra ribs was “extremely high” among the woolly mammoths. But they weren't just unusually common. The shape of the vertebrae suggested the bones were unusually large as well. In mice with cervical ribs, those with bigger bones have more health problems than those with smaller bones. “There was indeed a problem in this population,” Reumer said. There are two explanations for the high frequency of cervical ribs in mammoths, and both are probably part of the story, the researchers wrote. The first is that the mammoths were interbreeding. Mating with close relatives would be expected among a population that was dying off. The second explanation is that the mammoths were struggling with widespread hunger, disease and other environmental conditions. This would have made it difficult for female mammoths to bear healthy offspring. The Dutch researchers concluded that the high number of cervical ribs was probably because of "a combination of inbreeding and harsh conditions.” They went on to say that this vulnerability might have contributed to the mammoths' eventual extinction.