Mosquito bites infect millions of people every year with diseases like malaria and yellow fever. The Zika virus is the latest scourge that has scientists looking for new ways to kill mosquitoes. JOHANNESBURG, South Africa — As mosquitoes buzzed about her veranda one recent evening, Maureen Coetzee grabbed a device resembling a drinking straw. She used it to suck four mosquitoes into a jar. Coetzee, an international expert on mosquito control, quickly identified them as Aedes aegypti. The mosquito carries the Zika virus which is causing a crisis a continent away. Thousands of babies in Brazil have been born with abnormally tiny heads and brain damage. Scientists think the Zika virus is responsible. Coetzee is an entomologist at the University of Witwatersrand in South Africa. She has devoted her life to understanding mosquitoes — in order to kill them. No other animal has done so much harm to the human race. Each year, they infect millions of people with deadly viruses. Mosquitoes kill at least 600,000 each year, the vast majority of them children in Africa. The World Bank estimates that each year they cost African countries 1.3 percent of gross domestic product. It is the value of all goods and services produced by a country. Which raises the question: Why not try to wipe mosquitoes off the planet? Coetzee and other scientists said that would be extreme, given that only about 150 of the 3,500 species of mosquitoes carry deadly diseases. It would also be impossible to attack every mosquito breeding ground. Technology is bringing new biological weapons to the battle. Coetzee is researching a method to kill off mosquitoes that carry the malaria virus. She sterilizes male mosquitoes so they cannot have offspring, or children, and releases them into the wild. The idea relies on two basic facts: Mosquitoes mate only once, and only females bite. The method depends on releasing enough mosquitoes so that the current generation die out without reproducing offspring. The life span of a mosquito is two to four weeks. And for it to work, Coetzee said, millions of mosquitoes would have to be released monthly during malaria season. One advantage is that it allows scientists to target individual species of mosquitoes. “It makes sense to target only those mosquitoes that are involved in transmission of disease,” Coetzee explained. In the long history of the world’s battle against mosquitoes, experts have learned a  central lesson: Never back off. The moment that officials reduce their efforts, the insects bounce back, and outbreaks of deadly disease will follow. In the 1950s, the World Health Organization used an insecticide to kill mosquitoes that carried malaria. The disease seemed to disappear, but it came roaring back. Mosquitoes have become much less affected by insecticides. Another problem with insecticides is that mosquito breeding sites are easy to miss, said Laith Yakob, an expert at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. Aedes aegypti, which carries the Zika virus, is especially hard to reach. It often breeds in houses and can reproduce in thimble-sized pools of water. "Citywide, it would be impossible to eliminate all breeding sites,” he said. “And even if you did, the next time it rained, they would be back.” One of the newest technologies involves changing the genes of male mosquitoes. The offspring die before they can reproduce. Genes carry the instructions for how each part of the body works and is passed down from parents to children. A British company announced that it had conducted an experiment in the Brazilian city of Piracicaba. It cut the number of mosquito larvae, a young form of mosquito, by 82 percent. The company, Oxitec, plans to build a lab in Brazil. It would produce enough Aedes aegypti mosquitoes to protect a town of 300,000 from Zika. But groups like the Britain-based group Gene Watch are against Oxitec. They argue there is no proof that genetically changed mosquitoes have any benefits. Also, if you kill one species, another type of mosquito might take over. Back in Coetzee’s laboratory, thousands of mosquito eggs sat in a tub of water. They were already hatching into the larvae of a species that carries malaria. They’re interesting little creatures, said Coetzee, who has been studying mosquitoes for more than 40 years. “Three and a half thousand species is a lot of variation and some of them are very beautiful,” she said. To illustrate her point, she took a mosquito she had caught decades ago and placed it under a microscope. The mosquito is called Toxorhynchites brevipalpis, better known as the elephant mosquito. It has a wingspan of almost an inch and a striking blue thorax flecked with gold and fuzzy antennae. It lives off nectar and doesn’t bite humans.