Mosquito bites infect millions of people every year with diseases like malaria and yellow fever. The Zika virus is the latest scourge that has scientists looking for new ways to kill mosquitoes. JOHANNESBURG, South Africa — Mosquitoes buzzed about Maureen Coetzee's porch one recent evening. She grabbed something that looked like a drinking straw. She used it to suck four mosquitoes into a jar. Coetzee is an international expert on mosquitoes. She quickly identified them as Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. The mosquito carries the Zika virus. A germ that makes people sick is called a virus. Thousands of babies in Brazil have been born with very tiny heads and may have brain damage. Scientists think the Zika virus was responsible. Coetzee is an entomologist at the University of Witwatersrand in South Africa. Entomologists study insects. She has spent her life trying to understand mosquitoes — in order to kill them. No other animal has done so much harm to humans. Mosquitoes can carry deadly viruses. Each year, they bite  millions of people and made them sick. They kill at least 600,000 people each year, most of them children in Africa. Many people ask a good question. Why not try to kill all mosquitoes? Coetzee and other scientists said that is not a good solution. Only about 150 of the 3,500 different kinds of mosquitoes carry deadly diseases. It would also be impossible to attack every place where mosquitoes lay their eggs. Technology, though, is helping in the fight against mosquitoes. Coetzee is trying to find a way to kill mosquitoes that carry the malaria virus. She stops male mosquitoes from having offspring, or children. The life span of a mosquito is two to four weeks. For her idea to work, millions of mosquitoes would have to be released each month during malaria season. The method has a big advantage. Scientists can target only mosquitoes that carry viruses, Coetzee said. Not all mosquitoes would die off. Insecticides kill mosquitoes too. These bug sprays do not work as well as they used to. There is another problem. It is hard to find all the places mosquitoes lay their eggs, said Laith Yakob. He is an expert at a medical university. Aedes aegypti, which carries the Zika virus, is especially hard to find. It often breeds in houses and even in tiny pools of water the size of a thumb. It would be impossible to find all the breeding sites, He said. “And even if you did, the next time it rained, they would be back.” One of the newest technologies involves changing the genes of male mosquitoes. Genes hold the information that tells the body how to grow and work. They are passed down from parents to children. The young mosquitoes die before they can have offspring. A British company announced that it carried out a successful experiment in a Brazilian city. It killed most of mosquito larvae, a young form of the insect. The company, Oxitec plans to build a lab in Brazil. It would produce enough Aedes aegypti mosquitoes to protect a town of 300,000. Groups like the Britain-based group Gene Watch are against it. They argue that genetically changed mosquitoes do not have any benefits. Also, if you kill one type of mosquito, another type might take over. Back in Coetzee’s laboratory, thousands of mosquito eggs sat in a tub of water. They’re interesting little creatures, said Coetzee. She has been studying mosquitoes for more than 40 years.  She took a mosquito she caught many years ago and placed it under a microscope. The mosquito is called Toxorhynchites brevipalpis, better known as the elephant mosquito. It has a wingspan of almost an inch and is partly blue flecked with gold. It lives off nectar and does not bite humans. "Some of them are very beautiful,” Coetzee said.