The number of animals living freely in the wild is dwindling. Zoos are stepping up to help with wildlife conservation by asking visitors to chip in to protect animals in the wild. GORONGOSA NATIONAL PARK, Mozambique — Fifteen years of civil war wrecked Gorongosa park in Africa and thousands of animals died. In the 1970s the park held 3,000 zebras, but by 2012, only 10 remained. Today there are 15 more zebras living in the park thanks to zoo visitors 10,000 miles away. Visitors to Zoo Boise, in Idaho’s capital city, donated money with each zoo ticket they bought. The money went to purchase the zebras. The zebras in Mozambique, which were paid for in Idaho, are symbols of a new idea: zoos helping to protect animals in the wild. “I’ve been working at the zoo for a long time, so I see zebras every day. But those zebras were special,” said Steve Burns, director of Zoo Boise. “It brought it home to me, to be able to see how the money that we’ve given has been spent.” The zoo has promised $2 million to the African park over the next 10 years. Other zoos are trying similar ideas to support global wildlife and get visitors involved in conservation. Burns believes zoos and aquariums in the United States could become the biggest source of money for wildlife conservation in the world. He mentioned a well-known case of a zoo saving wild animals. The Bronx Zoo in New York City helped to save the American bison, also known as the American buffalo. In the early 1900s, the director of the Bronx Zoo traveled out West and captured the last of the wild bison. He brought them back to New York where he successfully bred them. Eventually, there were enough bison to release some back into the wild. “There wouldn’t be bison in this country if that had not happened,” Burns said. Zoo Boise uses a different plan to help wild animals. In 2007, it became the first zoo to charge a conservation fee to every visitor. Today, each person who visits the zoo pays 50 cents toward global conservation. From 2007 to 2013, Zoo Boise guests raised $1.2 million. The money has supported wildlife from ground squirrels in Idaho to the zebras and lions in Mozambique. Other zoos are using the same model — 228 zoos and aquariums in the United States donate $160 million a year to help conserve wildlife. “I’ve been pushing to see us get to $250 million,” Burns said. Zoos are changing from just places to see animals, to places where visitors can also help to save animals. Today, zoos help to breed rare species — such as the black-footed ferret and California condor — to eventually reintroduce them into the wild. “We felt that in response to the extinction crisis, we had to stand for something bigger than ourselves,” Burns said. The connection between Zoo Boise and Gorongosa National Park began thanks to an Idaho man who is using his fortune to help people. Philanthropist Greg Carr grew up in Idaho and is dedicated to restoring the African national park. Carr, who made his money in the technology industry, supports the Gorongosa Restoration Project. He began donating money to various causes in Idaho, before turning to conservation when he turned 40 years old. While visiting Mozambique in 2004, Carr saw the destruction caused by 15 years of civil war. Many of the animals in the park had been killed — some for food, and some for profit. The land was still beautiful. “I thought, ‘Wow, if we restore the park, we restore nature.’ We’re saving the treasure — the national symbol of this country,” Carr said. “We’ll create jobs, and I like the kind of jobs we create.” He said, “They are what’s called sustainable jobs, because they can last forever. Tourism jobs, science jobs, conservation jobs.” Carr has promised at least $40 million over 20 years to help restore Gorongosa. He has also helped to connect Mozambique and Idaho. “Most people have busy lives and they don’t know how to help. We’ve made it easy for them,” Burns says. “All they have to do is come to the zoo and do things they would want to do anyway, and when they walk out the door, they’re conservationists. They helped. And if you want to do more, come back again.” About 180 million people visit zoos and aquariums in the United States every year. “That’s more than major league baseball, football, hockey and basketball combined,” Burns said. “If you want to have wild places, you have to get people to care about them. We know how to do that. If you need people to take action so you can protect that wild place, we have 180 million people who can help do that kind of thing,” he said.