An Idaho zoo and a national park in Africa have linked up with a goal of protecting wildlife. Visitors to Zoo Boise donated money and as a result, the African park now has a new group of zebras. GORONGOSA NATIONAL PARK, Mozambique — More than 180 million people visit zoos and aquariums in the United States every year. That is more than go to baseball, football, hockey and basketball games combined. Those millions of people are not just seeing animals at the zoo. They are also helping to save wild animals around the world. A zoo in Idaho led the way. In 2007, it started a program to protect wild animals. It began to collect a little money from each visitor. The money added up, and the zoo used it to help protect zebras in Mozambique, a country in southeastern Africa. Gorongosa National Park in Mozambique needed help. A 15-year war damaged the park. Many animals were killed. Once there were thousands of zebras in the park. Only 10 were left by 2012. The money from Zoo Boise helped to buy 15 more zebras. They now live in a protected area of the park. The zebras in Mozambique are supported by zoo visitors 10,000 miles away. It is an example of a new idea: zoos helping to protect animals in the wild. “I’ve been working at the zoo for a long time, so I see zebras every day,” said Steve Burns, who runs Zoo Boise. “But those zebras were special.” Zoo Boise raised $1.2 million from visitors from 2007 to 2013. Some of that money goes to Mozambique to protect zebras and lions. Some of it protects squirrels in Idaho. Other zoos and aquariums have started similar programs. Altogether, zoos and aquariums in the United States raise $160 million a year to help protect wild animals around the world. “Most people have busy lives and they don’t know how to help. We’ve made it easy for them,” Burns says. “All they have to do is come to the zoo and do things they would want to do anyway. They helped. And if you want to do more, come back again.” The link between Idaho and Mozambique began with David Carr. He is from Idaho. Carr made a lot of money in technology companies. Then he started using his money to help people in Idaho. He supported a human rights education center and helped start the Museum of Idaho. Then Carr started looking for another project. He decided to help protect, or conserve, wild animals and wild places. He became a conservationist. Carr went to Mozambique in 2004. He visited Gorongosa National Park and saw the damage from the war. Many animals had been killed for food. Others were killed by people who needed money. Still, the land was beautiful. “I thought, ‘Wow, if we restore the park, we restore nature,’” Carr said. “We’re saving the treasure — the national symbol of this country.” Carr supports the Gorongosa Restoration Project. It's a plan to repair the damaged national park. He has promised to spend $40 million over 20 years to support the project. He also helped connect zoo visitors in Idaho with the zebras in Mozambique. Burns said zoos and aquariums in the United States could become the biggest source of money for wildlife conservation in the world.