When Zoo Boise asked its visitors to give up some of their spare change to wildlife conservation, "every penny counts" added up to $1.2 million. More than enough to restore African zebras. GORONGOSA NATIONAL PARK, Mozambique — Forty years ago, there were 3,000 zebras roaming Gorongosa park in Africa. In 2012, after 15 years of civil war, there were only about 10 zebras left. Today, thanks to zoo visitors in Idaho who contributed 50 cents at a time, there are 15 more zebras, held in a special pen. These zebras are symbols of how zoos are now helping to protect animals in the wild. “I’ve been working at the zoo for a long time, so I see zebras every day. But those zebras were special,” said Steve Burns, director of Zoo Boise in Idaho’s capital city. “It brought it home to me, to be able to see how the money that we’ve given has been spent.” Using money it collects from visitors, Zoo Boise supports Gorongosa National Park in Mozambique and has pledged to give it $2 million over the next 10 years. The partnership between the zoo and the African national park could be a model for other zoos that want to help restore threatened global wildlife and get zoo visitors involved in worldwide conservation. “I truly think that zoos and aquariums in the United States could be the biggest source of revenue for wildlife conservation in the world,” Burns said. Burns points to a success story from the turn of the last century: the Bronx Zoo in New York City helped to save the American bison, also known as American buffalo. In the early 1900s, the director of the Bronx Zoo, William Hornaday, traveled to the West and captured the last of the wild bison. He brought them back to New York and successfully bred them. “There wouldn’t be bison in this country if that had not happened,” Burns said. Zoo Boise is using a different strategy to help wild animals — charging a conservation fee to every zoo visitor. Boise became the first zoo to charge that fee in 2007, when each visitor paid a quarter to help animals in the wild. The conservation fee is now 50 cents, or $5 on an annual pass. Visitors to Zoo Boise raised $1.2 million from 2007 to 2013, supporting wildlife as close to home as the Southern Idaho ground squirrel and as far away as the zebras and lions in Mozambique. Other zoos have followed suit — the 228 institutions in the Association of Zoos and Aquariums donate $160 million a year to wildlife conservation. “I’ve been pushing to see us get to $250 million,” Burns said. It is a new idea for zoos, changing them from places to see animals, to places where visitors help to save animals. Zoos today help to breed rare species — such as the black-footed ferret and California condor — to eventually reintroduce them into the wild. “We felt that in response to the extinction crisis, we had to stand for something bigger than ourselves,” Burns said. The connection between Zoo Boise and Gorongosa National Park began thanks to an Idaho connection: Philanthropist Greg Carr grew up in Idaho and has made it his life’s work to restore the African national park. Carr, who made his fortune in the tech industry, is the driving force behind the Gorongosa Restoration Project. Carr began humanitarian work in 1998, originally using his fortune to fund projects in Idaho. He supported the Idaho Human Rights Education Center and the Idaho Anne Frank Memorial in Boise. He bought the former headquarters of white supremacists in north Idaho and turned it into a peace park. When Carr was 40, he started looking for another project and turned to conservation. Visiting Mozambique in 2004, Carr saw the devastation caused by 15 years of civil war. Many of the animals in the park had been killed — some for food, and some for profit. The land was still beautiful, though. “I thought, ‘Wow, if we restore the park, we restore nature.’ We’re saving the treasure — the national symbol of this country,” Carr said. “We’ll create jobs, and I like the kind of jobs we create.” He said, “They are what’s called sustainable jobs, because they can last forever. Tourism jobs, science jobs, conservation jobs." Carr has pledged at least $40 million over 20 years to help support the restoration of Gorongosa. He has also brought awareness of the problems in Mozambique to Idaho. “Most people have busy lives and they don’t know how to help. We’ve made it easy for them,” Burns says. “All they have to do is come to the zoo and do things they would want to do anyway, and when they walk out the door, they’re conservationists. They helped. And if you want to do more, come back again.” About 180 million people visit zoos and aquariums in the United States every year. “That’s more than major league baseball, football, hockey and basketball combined,” Burns said. “If you want to have wild places, you have to get people to care about them. We know how to do that. If you need people to take action so you can protect that wild place, we have 180 million people who can help do that kind of thing," he said.